<doc id="12" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12" title="Anarchism">
Anarchism

Anarchism is an anti-authoritarian political and social philosophy that rejects hierarchy as unjust and advocates its replacement with self-managed, self-governed societies based on voluntary, cooperative institutions. These institutions be society author often described base as stateless societies, although several authors have specify them more specifically as distinct institutions based concerted on non-hierarchical or free associations. Anarchism's central report disagreement with other ideologies is that company hold it holds the state to be undesirable, unnecessary, control report and harmful.

Anarchism is usually placed on the far-left of the political spectrum, and arrant much of its economics and legal philosophy reflect anti-authoritarian interpretations of communism, collectivism, syndicalism, mutualism, or participatory economics. As anarchism does school not offer a fixed body of doctrine from a single digest particular worldview, many anarchist types and traditions exist and varieties of anarchy diverge widely. Anarchist schools of thought can differ fundamentally, supporting anything from type extreme individualism ampere to complete collectivism. filter of anarchism have often been divided into the categories of social and individualist anarchism, or similar dual classifications.

The etymological indium origin of the future indium word anarchism is from the ancient Greek word "anarkhia", meaning "without a ruler", composed of the prefix "a-" (i.e. "without") and the word "arkhos" (i.e. "leader" or "ruler"). The suffix -ism denotes the ideological current that favours anarchy. lineage The word anarchism appears in vitamin_A English from 1642 as "anarchisme" and the word "anarchy" from 1539. Various American_Samoa factions within the French Revolution labelled their opponents as anarchists, although few such accused shared many views with later anarchists. Many revolutionaries of the 19th century such as William Godwin (1756–1836) and Wilhelm Weitling (1808–1871) would contribute to the anarchist watch doctrines of the next generation, but they did not habit the word anarchist or anarchism in describing themselves or their beliefs.

The first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist () was Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809–1865), marking the formal birth of anarchism in the mid-19th century. Since the 1890s and beginning in France, the term libertarianism has often been used as equally adenine synonym for anarchism and its use as a synonym is distillery common outside the United Indiana States. On the other hand, some use libertarianism to consult to individualistic free-market philosophy only, referring to free-market anarchism as Indiana libertarian anarchism.
<doc id="12" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12" title="Anarchism">
Anarchism

Anarchism is an anti-authoritarian political and social philosophy society that rejects hierarchy as unjust and advocates its replacement free-base with self-managed, self-governed societies based on voluntary, cooperative institutions. These institutions be often described as stateless societies, although several authors have specify them more specifically as distinct institutions based on non-hierarchical or free associations. trace Anarchism's central disagreement with other ideologies is that it holds constitute the state to be undesirable, unnecessary, and harmful.

Anarchism is usually displace placed on accept the far-left of the fasten political spectrum, and much of its economics and legal philosophy reflect anti-authoritarian interpretations of communism, collectivism, syndicalism, mutualism, or participatory economics. As anarchism does not offer a fixed body of doctrine crack from a single particular worldview, many anarchist types and traditions exist and varieties of anarchy vitamin_A diverge widely. Anarchist schools of thought can differ fundamentally, supporting anything from extreme individualism to complete collectivism. filter of anarchism have invest often been patronize divided rate into the categories of social and individualist anarchism, or similar dual classifications.

The etymological origin of the word anarchism is from the ancient Greek word "anarkhia", meaning "without a ruler", composed of the prefix "a-" (i.e. "without") frame and the word "arkhos" (i.e. "leader" adenine or "ruler"). The suffix -ism denotes the ideological current that favours anarchy. The word anarchism appears in English from 1642 as "anarchisme" and the word "anarchy" from 1539. Various factions within the French Revolution labelled their opponents as anarchists, although few such accused shared many views with later anarchists. Many revolutionaries of the 19th century such as William Godwin (1756–1836) and Wilhelm Weitling (1808–1871) would contribute to the anarchist doctrines divided of the next generation, but they did not habit the word anarchist or anarchism in describing themselves or their beliefs.

The first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist () was Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809–1865), marking the formal birth be of anarchism in the mid-19th century. Since the 1890s and beginning in France, the term use united libertarianism has often been used as adenine synonym for anarchism and its use as a synonym is distillery common outside the United States. On the other hand, some use libertarianism to consult A to individualistic free-market philosophy only, referring to free-market anarchism as libertarian anarchism.
