id="624" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=624" title="Alaska">
Alaska

; ; Alutiiq: "Alas'kaaq;" ) a in the the United States West Coast, just across the Strait The province and state the southeast. Its most is Attu and it has a with Russia to across Bering To the are the Chukchi and seas—southern parts the Arctic The lies the and southwest. It U.S. area seventh subnational division world. it is 3rd least populous sparsely of States; nevertheless, by most populous territory mostly 60th parallel in North America: its at 738,432 States Census Bureau in the populations of Northern Canada half metropolitan Alaska's is by the natural gas, industries, resources in States bases and a part the economy.

On March 1867, the United purchased Alaska from the Empire U.S. or cents ($4.74/km). The area went through several administrative before territory May 1912. was admitted 49th of on January 3, 1959.

was introduced in Russian colonial period when it to It derived an which refers to the Literally, it action is directed".

is westernmost in the has most easterly longitude United States because Aleutian Islands extend into the Eastern Hemisphere. only state North America; about of Columbia (Canada) separates Alaska Washington. It continental U.S., but sometimes not in Alaska is of contiguous Lower city, Juneau, is the mainland but is not by of highway system.

The by Yukon and Columbia Canada, to the the Gulf of and the Ocean to Bering Strait, and Sea to the west to the north. territorial waters waters Bering Strait, Diomede and Little Island are has a longer than all states
Alaska is largest the States by total area , twice the of the largest Alaska larger but 18 Counting territorial larger the combined of the next three largest states: California, Montana. It larger area of U.S. states.

are officially the regions of widely accepted

most region of Alaska, Matanuska-Susitna Kenai Rural, mostly unpopulated areas south the Range also within definition of South as do the Prince William Sound the communities Cordova

referred to is the of Alaska the rest of the United States. most initial non-indigenous occurred in years following Alaska Purchase. The is the Alexander Archipelago well as the National the largest national in the United It the Juneau, the former capital Sitka, and one time largest The Highway provides a vital transportation link the as Hyder and Skagway) enjoy to contiguous North road system. designated in 1963.

The largest of Alaska; much it is uninhabited Fairbanks the only city in the region. highest mountain

Southwest Alaska is sparsely inhabited region the Bering of the population along coast. Kodiak also Southwest. The Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta, one of the largest in is Portions of the Peninsula are considered part of with remaining portions included with the Aleutian Islands (see below).

The tundra with small villages. The area for its reserves oil, and both the Petroleum Reserve–Alaska the Bay formerly known is northernmost the United States Northwest area, by Kotzebue also River is often regarded as being of region. the North and of the Northwest Arctic seldom consider themselves be

More small islands this chain, over into the Ocean. Some of islands in Eastern Hemisphere, but Date drawn of 180° to the and thus American continent, within same day. Two of the islands, Attu and Kiska, Japanese War II.

islands, has nearly tidal The west from the southern tip of the Alaska Peninsula. active are the Aleutians and in coastal for home Shishaldin, which occasionally that rises to North most perfect volcanic more than Mount The volcanoes extends west Anchorage the Geologists have large region of multiple states provinces actively continent

of the tides just south Anchorage, differences can more
Alaska has lakes. and permafrost cover northern, western and southwest flatlands). Alaska. is the in alone.

According October report by the United States Bureau of owned managed the government as public lands, including multitude national forests, parks, national the Bureau , the The Arctic National Refuge is managed by the United States Fish It wildlife .

remaining land Alaska owns its under Act. A portion of that is occasionally ceded to organized the pertaining to boroughs. portions aside for subdivisions other opportunities. These not very popular due often remote and The University of Alaska, as a land university, also substantial which independently.

regional, of local, Native the Claims Act of 1971. Regional Limited often the largest private Alaska and other of allowing holdings on open in 1991 were repealed before they take effect. the hold title (including title in many cases, Alaskans) but cannot Individual Native and are sold the open

Various private own remaining totaling one percent the state. Alaska is, by margin, state the percentage of private land excluded.

The climate mid-latitude classification: "Cfb") in southern and climate "Cfc") the northern parts. annual Southeast both the wettest part temperatures and precipitation Juneau averages precipitation a year, averages is also region in which the daytime high is during months.

The climate of is mild due the region's proximity to the seacoast. the area gets less rain than Alaska, it gets tend to be Anchorage receives precipitation a snow, although there are in the central which receive far a subarctic climate () its summers.

The climate of Alaska determined the of Alaska. It is subarctic in and farther considering north the is. This a of variety area stretching from northern side the Peninsula the Kobuk valley the region around is with less annually. On extreme, between Dillingham average precipitation.

of the of subarctic. of and around near Fairbanks. summers may reaching (the low-to-mid while in winter, the below . Precipitation is sparse Interior, often less year, what tends to the entire winter.

and in Alaska in the Interior. The highest in is just the arctic on making tied as with lowest temperature the United The official temperature Prospect Creek on January 23, 1971, degree the recorded North America Snag, Yukon,

climate in extreme () with winters short, summers. July, low in is Precipitation is light in part Alaska, averaging than per snow which on the

Alaska for thousands years before of to the Linguistic DNA studies done here provided evidence for the settlement North by way the Bering land bridge. the Upward River the Tanana Valley in Alaska, remains six-week-old were The DNA showed that she belonged was separate from native groups elsewhere World at of Potter, the University Fairbanks archaeologist who unearthed the remains at River site this new group The Tlingit people kinship of inheritance descent in today Southeast along with parts British Columbia the in Haida, now for their unique arts. The people Alaska from British Columbia 1887, when Cleveland, and later the Congress, granted them permission on Annette Metlakatla. three of peoples, as well other indigenous peoples the Pacific Northwest experienced late 18th through mid-19th century, the epidemics occurring in the and 1860s, resulting fatalities

Islands are home the although they were Russians. Western Alaska are the Alutiiq ~ Sugpiaq Alaska. Gwich'in the northern Interior region are known for their dependence the within Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. The North Slope Little Diomede by widespread people.

Some believe first Russian settlement was century. According this hypothesis, 1648 koches of Dezhnyov's ashore in Alaska storm this This hypothesis is on testimony of Chukchi geographer Daurkin, who had visited Alaska in 1764–1765 and who on the Kheuveren by "bearded who "pray to the icons". Some researchers with Koyuk River.

vessel to Alaska is generally held to the "St. Gabriel" under the M. assistant navigator I. Fyodorov on 1732, during of A. F. explorer Dmitry

Another European contact Alaska 1741, when Vitus an the Navy aboard returned sea judged to be finest in the small associations of traders from shores of Aleutian Islands. The was founded in 1784.
Between and Spain to in assert over the Northwest. In Spanish were in Sound. These names as Sound, and Later, the Company during the century.

renamed New to on in now Southeast Alaska, the Russian America. remained the capital colony transferred United Russians fully Alaska, and the was very profitable. Evidence of in churches southeast

March United Alaska sum It months in Sitka the formal transfer was formal on 18, original ceremony 250 U.S. soldiers, who marched the governor's house at Russian troops lowered and flag is celebrated Day, a holiday

William the Secretary negotiated Purchase (also known as Folly) with the loosely governed the military 1884, a governor appointed President of the A federal district headquartered in Sitka.

For first under the flag, Sitka was the only inhabited American settlers. They "provisional city but Legislation Alaskan communities legally cities come until cities was limited or unavailable statehood took effect in 1959.

in 1890s and stretching in some the 1910s, gold rushes and Yukon of miners and incorporated organized 1912. Alaska's capital, had Sitka was to Juneau. Construction of the Alaska Governor's that same year. European also settled Alaska, where they the logging
During War the Campaign the three Aleutian Islands—Attu, and invaded and occupied between 1942 and 1943. During one civilian was killed Japanese and in about half of them died. Unalaska/Dutch became a significant for the States Army Navy

States program involved of warplanes through to Fairbanks Nome; Soviet of these ferrying them to fight of military to the of Alaskan

Statehood was important cause James in his tenure congressional Decades the statehood movement real momentum following in The Alaska Committee and Constitutional Convention would soon fighting major battles against the U.S. Alaska. approved Congress on

In Census Bureau reported population 3% 18.8% Indian Native.

27, the massive Good Friday 133 several villages of large coastal mainly by resultant tsunamis and was the second-most-powerful earthquake in recorded history of the world, moment of 9.2. It thousand times powerful than the 1989 Francisco of day (5:36 pm), year location of were cited factors in of lives,

1968 discovery of at Prudhoe and the 1977 completion of Trans-Alaska System led to boom. from oil funded budgets onward. Alaska tax.

the "Exxon Valdez" a in Prince William Sound, oil over coastline. Today, the battle of development and conservation is seen drilling in Arctic the proposed Mine.

The Survey (AHRS) is of all historic and prehistoric sites the state History and The survey's of cultural resources objects, buildings, sites, and travel with a are over 50 years , 35,000

United States Census the population of on 2018, a increase since United States

In 2010, Alaska ranked as 47th state by North and Wyoming (and D.C.). Dakota Alaska is populated state, of the in the world, at , the at . Alaska by far the state by area, wealthiest capita , the unemployment
one 14 U.S. states have only one telephone code.

According the 2010 States Alaska, had 710,231. In of state (64.1% Non-Hispanic White), and Native, 5.4% 3.3% African American, Native and Islander, from Race, 7.3% from or More Races. Hispanics or Latinos made up of

, 50.7% of Alaska's one of age to (i.e., did not have two parents white ancestry).

to 2011 people of English home. About 3.5% spoke Spanish at home, another language, 4.3% an (including Tagalog), and about other at home.

Center at University Alaska that 20 languages exist and there some dialects. of languages belong either the or families; however, some languages thought to be have not yet classified (e.g. Tsimshianic). of Alaska's languages were as either shifting, moribund, nearly

total speak one the state's 20 known as "native

In October Alaska signed the languages official status. This bill gave symbolic as languages, though not been for official use within the government. in the bill are:

to by of Religion Data from 2010, about Alaska were religious 100,960 as Evangelical 50,866 Catholic, 32,550 4% 0.5% Muslim, 0.5% are Buddhist, 0.2% Bahá'í, are Hindu. The religious in Alaska with adherents, non-denominational Protestants with 38,070 adherents, Jesus Christ Latter-day Saints with adherents, and Southern Baptist Convention with 19,891 adherents. has identified, along Washington and being the least USA, in terms membership,

In the First Intermarriage with helped the Russian immigrants into a number of Russian Orthodox within has the (by percentage) state. In there were 6,000 Jews Alaska observance halakha problems). often venues and communities, including Sikhs and

Estimates the of Muslims in range from to 5,000. Community Center of Anchorage in late mosque broke building in in 2010 completion 2014. completed, the be one the mosques in world. also Center.

-Total employment

The 2018 48th in Its per for 2018 was the nation. According a 2013 study Phoenix had the fifth-largest of capita with The oil dominates the Alaskan with than revenues petroleum extraction. main export product gas) seafood, primarily and crab.

a of Alaskan Agricultural production for consumption within the state nursery dairy products, vegetables, is limited, with general

Employment primarily government such natural extraction, shipping, and bases are the Star, boroughs, as well as Kodiak. also important part of economy, state to keep taxes low. crude petroleum, natural gas, coal, gold, metals, and mining, and wood products. is also and tourism contributed economy by supporting

Alaska energy although its oil reserves have largely depleted. Major gas reserves were (ANS) and Cook Inlet basins, but to Energy Alaska had fallen to place oil after North Dakota, and California. Bay on Alaska's Slope field in the United producing about , early Dakota's producing Prudhoe Bay was the largest America, was much than Canada's Athabasca oil sands field, which by 2014 was producing unconventional and had hundreds of years of

Pipeline transport pump to crude oil per day, more than oil pipeline the coal are found in sub-bituminous, and basins. United Geological Survey there are of technically from natural North Slope. Alaska offers of the highest hydroelectric power potential in the country its swaths of Alaskan offer geothermal potential as
Alaska's heavily expensive fuel for heating, electric and and hydroelectric power abundant statewide energy (e.g. with judged (at time report, due distances cost in Alaska is to sixty the prices generally significantly higher vary depending transportation costs, seasonal peaks, nearby development and many other

The is appropriation of manage a state petroleum revenues in anticipation recently constructed Trans-Alaska Pipeline System. The was proposed Governor Miller the of the 1969 lease of that the of (which amounted at It was later Hammond and Kenai state representative Hugh It has an attractive prospect which would be into the general fund.

The Alaska so to discourage dedicating state funds a The Fund rare exception this, mostly distrust existing during time of creation. From its principal of $734,000, the to as result oil royalties investment all the principal is invested conservatively outside Alaska. This led to frequent calls by Alaskan to make within though such a has never gained

in 1982, from the fund's have paid out year $1,000 in to payout, distribution of payments was in the to $3,269 (which a one-time $1,200 "Resource Rebate"). Every year, state legislature takes earnings, 3% into the principal proofing, and remaining 5% all qualifying the Permanent Fund Dividend, one must lived in the state minimum months, residency to allowable absences, and be subject to judgments criminal convictions which fall under various may subject the payment amount to garnishment.

Permanent often considered be one of a income" in the

The of in higher in contiguous Federal employees, particularly Service (USPS) workers and receive a Cost of 25% pay because, while cost of living has gone down, it of the in the

Alaska from high for food the rest of country, due the infrastructure.

northern and season, farming occurs Alaska. Most in Matanuska Valley, of Anchorage, or Kenai Peninsula, about southwest Anchorage. The short 100-day that but long summer days for growing seasons. The primary crops are lettuce, cabbage.

Tanana Valley is agricultural especially the Junction area, about Fairbanks, with a concentration of agronomic crops; lie north east of set and developed state during second of and West Fairbanks another concentration hotel and agriculture.

has experienced in of gardeners, and markets in years, with the highest percentage increase in nation in growth in to 17% nationwide. industry has the season to a in supply elsewhere world, thereby filling a
Alaska, no county However, small assortment state local fairs (with Alaska State in Palmer are mostly in the summer. The fairs are with historic or agricultural and feature local farmers exhibiting produce in high-profile such carnival rides, food. "Alaska Grown" is used an agricultural slogan.

has an of with the primary Bering the North Pacific. is the few within the than outside it. take advantage of seasons while subsistence, as sport. This fish taken

Hunting for subsistence, caribou, moose, and sheep common particularly in remote Bush a food Akutaq, the ice can reindeer fat, dried meat and

reindeer Peninsula, wild caribou can be from mingling and migrating reindeer.

is into the state and in the cities expensive. In rural areas, subsistence essential activity because imported prohibitively small and villages in the coastline, of villages be of the difficult road conditions, which change dramatically, due to climate and precipitation changes. The can high per pound ($1.10/kg) in remote areas, during the locations be inclement and terrain The cost delivering milk is about in many per capita be $20,000 or less. cost per is twenty thirty cents than average, with only Hawaii

road rest the U.S. state's road covers a relatively small of central centers and the Alaska principal of Canada. capital, Juneau, not accessible road, only car ferry; this has spurred over decades the to city on road or building a road Haines. system communities with the rest
of a total 1082 One unique Alaska Highway system is the Anderson an active Railroad tunnel recently to provide paved roadway link with isolated William Sound southeast Anchorage at the tunnel the longest North until tunnel is longest road tunnel

Built around 1915, the Alaska Railroad a role in the Alaska century. It links north Pacific through providing infrastructure with tracks run Interior Alaska by through Anchorage, Eklutna, Wasilla, with to and North The cities, villages, and served ARR statewide as Railbelt". In recent years, paved highway system to the Alaska's

played vital role development, moving freight while resources southward (i.e., coal Usibelli near Seward Matanuska Valley to Anchorage). It for its passenger

The the last railroads North cabooses regular service uses them gravel It to stop in of along area Talkeetna remains inaccessible by road; the only cabins Until the Highway 1970s, provided the only access to of region its entire

Southeast the White and Yukon also through Skagway Canada and Yukon Territory), crossing border at White Summit. This is mainly used by arriving by at Skagway. 1983 BBC series Little Railways."

The Alaska Rail network connected nearest to the American is terminus the Canadian National Railway British the southeast.) In U.S. Congress authorized $6 million to study feasibility between Canada, and the lower

Alaska Rail provides float service between and Seattle.

Many and in the state have the of involve travel by air, or the sea.

Alaska's ferry system (known Alaska Highway) Gulf Coast The transport vehicles as as passengers. system also operates a service Washington Rupert, British Columbia, Canada Inside Passage Skagway. Inter-Island Ferry also an important marine for communities the of Wales region Southeast and works concert the Alaska Highway.

years, have a connecting Pacific Southeast Alaska and, a lesser towns along Alaska's coast. population of rise people during summer, cruise ships of

Cities not served by only by foot, dogsled, or snowmachine, accounting for Alaska's extremely well bush air Anchorage a lesser extent served many airlines. limited highway access, air the of in state. completed construction at Stevens Anchorage to the upsurge (in 2012–2013, Alaska received visitors).

to most and within the are commercially viable are to provide, heavily subsidized the government the Essential Service Alaska is major airline combination and passenger from Anchorage Fairbanks regional hubs like Nome, Kotzebue, Dillingham, Kodiak, other as well as major Southeast
of remaining commercial offerings from small regional airlines such Frontier Flying smallest villages must on scheduled or chartered bush flying services using aircraft such the Caravan, the popular aircraft the state. Much service can attributed to Alaska bypass program subsidizes bulk mail to Alaskan rural communities. program requires of go to who passenger service to the

Many communities from demand for to the quintessentially is bush The busiest seaplane base is Ted Anchorage Airport, where bound for remote villages cargo, and many items stores clubs. 2006 highest pilots per any U.S. state.

is the dogsled. modern is, time after the 1920s), mushing more of sport means are around the state, but the the Trail Race, a Anchorage (although distance from year to year, the official distance set at The the run dogs like Togo Balto took community means of had Mushers from come each cash, prizes, The "Serum is sled dog that more accurately follows the route of the 1925 relay, from the of to

In areas not served by road or rail, summer all-terrain and winter by "snow is

Alaska's internet other data transport largely GCI owns calls the Optic and as of late advertised it has fiber optic paths to the lower and two across Alaska. January 2011, it was reported that a Asia and rural was being in part by government.

Like all U.S. Alaska is a with three government: executive the governor Alaska her executive departments; a legislative consisting the Alaska House of and Senate; and a judicial branch consisting Alaska Supreme Court and courts.

state of

Legislature 40-member House Representatives and 20-member Senators four-year House members Alaska terms. The governor separately in the general election, and lieutenant run on same

Alaska's court system four Alaska of Appeals, the superior the courts. The superior and district are courts. are of general jurisdiction, courts certain types cases and cases valued $100,000.

The the Court of are Court Appeals required hear appeals from lower-court decisions, including regarding criminal juvenile delinquency, habeas corpus. Supreme may in criminal appeals.

in its early state, has been characterized as Republican-leaning. Local political worked issues development, rights. Natives, while their communities, have active within Native over large tracts of land, require

Alaska was only state in possession of ounce or less marijuana legal law, the federal remains in

state has an movement on secession Independence

and Democrats have served of In Republican governor Wally Hickel elected to the for a term in 1990 after leaving party briefly the Independence Party just long Republican 1994.

voter initiative took effect on February 24, placing Alaska Colorado and Washington as the three recreational is legal. law over can consume small they can find it. is illegal to sell.) first legal store in Valdez in October

Taxes collected Alaska Department Revenue – Tax Division.

To state primarily petroleum revenues and subsidies. This allows to lowest tax burden It one five states no tax, with no individual tax, only state has neither. The Revenue reports the state's sources. The Department also its operations, including laws that directly affect

While tax, 89 municipalities a local tax, from typically Other taxes levied raw bed-and-breakfast 'bed' taxes, gaming tabs) taxes transfer taxes. part of revenue from state license fees (such as telephone with Alaska.

the in as no Fairbanks Star (FNSB). sales the FNSB has been voted times, but to be leading to increase dramatically on such as

In Foundation ranked having fourth "business friendly" only Wyoming, South Dakota,

Alaska regularly supports in presidential has done statehood. have the state's votes all one it in (1964). No state has voted a Democratic candidate Alaska carried nominee Lyndon his landslide election while 1960 and 1968 were have the state margins. In 2008, Republican John defeated Democrat Obama to was Sarah state's governor the on major ticket. Obama again in 2012, of the state's in first to so

The Bush, central Juneau, and Anchorage, the University of Alaska Fairbanks campus and have been strongholds of the Democratic Party. The Matanuska-Susitna majority of Fairbanks the military and South Anchorage typically have the strongest Republican showing. , well registered voters have "Undeclared" as their affiliation, recent close to

of to other U.S. one the U.S. House seat held Republican Don Young, who to his term congressional is one the constituencies area.

2008, Sarah the Republican woman on a national she running mate. She continued prominent national figure after resigning from governor's in July

Alaska's States belong Class and 3. Democrat Mark of Republican senator Stevens. had been on seven felony of failing report gifts Senate discloser forms the The conviction aside April 2009 after evidence of prosecutorial misconduct emerged.

Frank held state's other governor in he from appointed his daughter, State Murkowski his She won terms 2016.

is divided counties, of it of more of state are part 16 somewhat to counties county-equivalents in 49 states, boroughs do not cover the land the state. The part of any borough is referred as the Unorganized Borough.

The Unorganized has of its in with the divided Unorganized into areas solely purposes of analysis presentation. district" is mechanism for public Alaska. state is into which under State Recorder. districts use same criteria, schedule, for documents public record.

U.S. states use system of only two to the population density, most is the Borough. As the implies, it has intermediate government but is directly state 2000, of this 13.05% population.

the government the Anchorage Area Borough in form the Municipality Anchorage, proper and communities of Eagle River, Chugiak, Peters Creek, Girdwood, and Indian. a borough Fairbanks North Star Borough) City

The state's populous is Anchorage, to 278,700 of whom live in richest location in Alaska per capita income is Cove ($89,895). Yakutat Sitka, and Anchorage are the largest cities the U.S. by

As United States of census-designated tally cities four municipalities, essentially the equivalent a consolidated majority of these in rural expanse Alaska as Bush" are contiguous American road table the of 100 largest places in

Alaska's figure people, of the not live in an city census-designated figure live in urban suburban Ketchikan, Kodiak, CDPs have established for these areas by the seven for neighborhoods in the Census (Clover Herring Cove, Mountain Point, Tongass Saxman East), but not The population was both within the Unorganized

The of and Early Development administers many districts Alaska. In addition, the state operates Mt. Edgecumbe in provides for Nenana Student Center in Nenana The Interior Academy

There a dozen colleges in Alaska. Accredited in Alaska University of Alaska University of Alaska University Alaska Pacific University. is only state has no that of Division I.

Labor and Workforce Development Alaska's Institute of Seward and one-week to 11-month training as diverse Information Technology, Welding, Mechanics.

Alaska has had with "brain drain". Many of people, including most of highest academic leave state after high and do not , did school medical school. The University of Alaska has by to top 10% Alaska graduates, via Alaska Program.

Alaska Troopers are Alaska's statewide force. They long not an official organization until force officially Alaska was various agencies. have their police and some rely "Public Safety who have training but not In much troopers the force available. In addition traffic Due to varied terrain and of employ a variety of and patrol vehicles.

Many rural having the importation alcoholic Suicide rates than

Domestic abuse and crimes are at high levels the state; is part linked abuse. has the highest sexual assault in the nation, in areas. The average of victims 16 In cases, relatives, or acquaintances.

Some Alaska's annual events the Iditarod Trail Sled Race from to Nome, World Ice Art in Fairbanks, the Festival Hummingbird Ketchikan, Sitka Whale Fest, and the River in Wrangell. River attracts the largest springtime of the world.

The Native Heritage celebrates rich Alaska's is cross-cultural among people enhance self-esteem The promotes and Native from and the

Influences on music include the music of Alaska as brought by immigrants from Europe. Prominent from include singer traditional flautist folk singer-songwriter Libby Roderick, Christian Lincoln and and Portugal. Man.

There established music in Alaska Folk Festival, the Summer Arts Folk the Athabascan Fiddling Festival, and the Summer most orchestra is Anchorage Symphony Orchestra, though the Fairbanks Symphony and Juneau Symphony The Anchorage Opera is currently the state's only opera are several volunteer semi-professional organizations in the

official state of is "Alaska's was in it celebrates flag of Alaska.

Alaska's first independent made Alaska by E. in and around Anchorage. 1924 Alaska Moving Corporation, film the company made.

of most prominent filmed in Alaska MGM's Magnificent", starring Alaska In an out MGM's in Alaska film what Biggest Ever Made". Upon in up Hollywood" in they during of the Mayer spared expense of the location, going so as hire the chef from Hotel to prepare meals.

When premiered Astor New City, studio received the largest amount of feedback its "Eskimo" was and worldwide; as a Mala became an international first for Best Film Editing the Academy and showcased preserved of on film.

movie "Never Wolf" partially in Alaska. The 1991 Fang", based Jack London's novel and starring Hawke, filmed in Haines. Steven 1994 Deadly starring at the Worthington Glacier near Valdez. The film David Strathairn, Mary Kris

thriller starring Al Pacino and Robin in film by Penn, The filmed and set in Alaska. The film, which name, the adventures Christopher McCandless, who in a the west Healy 1992.

Many and television set in filmed example, "Northern set in town of Cicely, in Roslyn, Washington. 2007 horror "30 of Night" is set but was filmed in

television shows are filmed in the Daily found set in state.







</doc>
id="627" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=627" title="Agriculture">
Agriculture

is the science and key development rise of civilization, of domesticated food surpluses enabled cities. The of agriculture began of ago. gathering grains at began plant them around 11,500 years ago. Pigs, sheep were domesticated 10,000 ago. least 11 regions world. agriculture on large-scale in century dominate though people depended on into

Modern breeding, agrochemicals pesticides and fertilizers, technological developments have increased yields, ecological and environmental Selective breeding and animal husbandry of but raised concerns about welfare environmental damage. Environmental issues include contributions to global warming, aquifers, resistance, and growth meat Genetically modified are widely some are banned in countries.

major can broadly into foods, fuels and Food classes fruits, oils, milk, fungi one-third world's in second to sector, the number of agricultural has significantly over

The "agriculture" is late Middle of "agricultūra", from "ager", "field", its turn came αγρός, and "cultūra", or "growing". While refers certain species of termite and also cultivate Agriculture is varying broadest sense natural resources to commodities which maintain life, including fiber, products, and services". Thus defined, includes arable husbandry but horticulture and practice often excluded.

The development agriculture to grow many times sustained hunting and Agriculture in different parts the a diverse at least 11 separate were collected eaten at 105,000 ago. From around years ago, the founder crops, and einkorn wheat, barley, peas, flax in between and with the earliest known cultivation 5,700 BC, followed soy and were domesticated Mesopotamia between 13,000 11,000 years ago. Cattle the wild aurochs in and Pakistan 10,500 years Pig production in Eurasia, including East and Southwest wild boar were first domesticated 10,500 In the Andes was between 10,000 and along with beans, alpacas, and guinea and were New years Sorghum domesticated of by 7,000 Cotton was by ago, and independently in Eurasia. In Mesoamerica, wild teosinte into maize 6,000 ago.
have to historical agriculture. of transition from hunter-gatherer agricultural societies indicate period of intensification increasing examples are the Natufian culture in Levant, and Chinese in China. Then, wild that had started to be

Eurasia, Sumerians started villages from about the Tigris and Euphrates rivers a 3,000 BC; seed-ploughs around Farmers wheat, as and and fruits including dates, grapes, figs. agriculture Nile River and flooding. Farming in the period of the after food wheat as flax and papyrus. wheat, barley and 9,000 BC, sheep goats were domesticated Mehrgarh was cultivated by the BC. evidence animal-drawn plough 2,500 BC in Indus Valley Civilisation.
In century a granary and Water-powered mills were in use by the 1st century BC, followed by irrigation. By the late century, heavy developed with iron ploughshares mouldboards. These across rice domesticated ago – depending clock estimate that is used – on River southern single genetic origin from In Greece and Rome, cereals were barley, alongside peas, beans, olives. Sheep and for products.

Americas, Mesoamerica from teosinte) squash, beans, and by Mayo Chinchipe upper around
The probably in or Southwest. The Aztecs developed systems, terraced fertilized their soil, and developed or artificial islands. The used canal and 400 BC. the Andes, as tobacco, and pineapple. Cotton was by Animals including llamas, alpacas, there. of the East domesticated such sunflower, wild rice sugar harvested. The a hybrid of a developed Europe and North The of Southwest and the Northwest practiced fire-stick farming. controlled fire on a create low-intensity fire ecology that sustained agriculture in loose sort "wild" system the Three developed three crops were squash, maize, and climbing beans.

Indigenous long to practised systematic enhance natural productivity in and other groups developed systems from 5,000 ago. There is evidence of across continent of Australia, central and yams, and onions, in permanent settlements.

the Ages, both in Europe, agriculture transformed with techniques and the diffusion including the of cotton fruit trees (such the Europe way brought crops as maize, potatoes, to and Old crops such as wheat, barley, and turnips, (including to
Irrigation, and advanced from the the allowing rise significantly. agriculture developed nations, in large rises in mechanization replaces and assisted by synthetic fertilizers, and Haber-Bosch method the synthesis of ammonium nitrate fertilizer industrial scale, greatly increasing crop yields and sustaining further increase in global agriculture has raised or encountered ecological, and economic including genetically tariffs and subsidies, alternative as the organic

Pastoralism domesticated pastoralism, herds are to in search of water. of is practised arid and semi-arid Asia some parts of

In cultivation, small is cleared and burning the The land used soil area land is selected This is practiced in with where the regenerates quickly. This practice used in India, the Amazon

Subsistence farming practiced to or alone, with transport elsewhere. in Monsoon Asia South-East Asia. An estimated 2.5 billion farmers in cultivating 60% of land.

Intensive cultivation to a a high inputs (water, automation). It is practiced countries.

twentieth agriculture increased productivity. It synthetic and but water pollution, and often farm recent years there a backlash against environmental effects of conventional resulting the organic, and sustainable movements. One major forces this movement has Union, in 1991 began reform its Policy (CAP) in 2005 to commodity-linked farm subsidies, known as of organic renewed in technologies integrated pest selective breeding, technological developments genetically modified Demand for non-food biofuel crops, development former rising transportation climate change, demand in China India, and food parts world. The International Agricultural that in smallholder agriculture be part of concerns prices and favorable experience Vietnam. Soil and such rust are approximately 40% of the world's land seriously By output China largest the European Union, the United total factor productivity this measure agriculture in the United States times more productive was in

the three-sector theory, of in agriculture and (such fishing) be more than 80% the least developed countries, than 2% the most highly countries. the Industrial many countries made proportion people agriculture steadily the century Europe, for between 55 the population engaged in agriculture; the had dropped to 35 and countries today,
the start of the 21st billion people, or 1/3 work approximately the employment and many countries employs the largest percentage women of any industry. sector sector as employer in 2007.

specifically farming, hazardous and farmers worldwide of work-related injuries, disease, diseases, as certain related chemical use and prolonged On involve the machinery, a agricultural injuries developed rollovers. and other chemicals used in farming can also to health, exposed pesticides have defects. an which share and live on can be at risk for illness, death. 0–6 may be an especially vulnerable in injuries among machinery and accidents, including all-terrain vehicles.

International Labour Organization "one of all sectors". the work-related death toll employees is least average jobs. In addition, death, injury to unreported. organization developed in Agriculture Convention, which range risks in the agriculture occupation, the these role organizations engaged in

States, has the National Institute Safety and as industry Research to intervention for occupational and
In European the European Agency for and Health at issued health safety directives in livestock horticulture, The Agricultural Council America (ASHCA) holds a summit to discuss

Overall by listed.

farms on the available resources and constraints; geography and of government policy; economic, social and and the farmer.

system in are burnt, releasing nutrients cultivation of and perennial a period several plot is fallow to forest, to a new many years This fallow if density grows, requiring of nutrients (fertilizer or pest control. cultivation is of in which is no period. greater and pest inputs.

industrialization the of monocultures, one cultivar is planted Because low nutrient is and pests up, greater use pesticides fertilizers. Multiple in which sequentially in and intercropping, several are grown the are annual cropping systems known

In timing extent of agriculture be rainfall, either allowing multiple annual crops year, In all these environments crops are (coffee, chocolate) and are practiced as agroforestry. temperate where were or highly productive is system.

Important food include cereals, legumes, forage, fruits Natural fibers cotton, wool, hemp, silk Specific are cultivated distinct world. in millions of metric based FAO

of animals milk, or and for and transport. horses, alpacas, donkeys, and dogs, centuries been fields, harvest wrangle and transport products to

production can grassland-based, mixed, 30% area was producing livestock, with the employing 1.3 Between the 1960s and the was significant increase production, both by carcass weight, beef, of which increased almost a factor 10. Non-meat as cows and egg-producing significant production increases. cattle, sheep and continue through 2050. Aquaculture or fish the production fish consumption in confined fastest sectors of food at an average of a between 1975 and

the the 20th century, using selective livestock breeds crossbreeds increased while disregarding need preserve This trend has a significant in diversity and resources among breeds, leading to a corresponding disease resistance and found among

Grassland based production upon material such as pastures feeding inputs may used, manure is directly to grassland a This is important in production is feasible because of representing million production systems use fodder crops and grain feed crops ruminant monogastric (one stomach; chickens typically recycled a fertilizer crops.

Landless systems upon feed from farm, de-linking of crop and livestock production more in Organisation Development member countries. fertilizers heavily for production and manure utilization challenge well as a for pollution. Industrialized countries use these of supplies estimate that of livestock and will in confined feeding operations, sometimes called this growth is in countries in with smaller amounts Some of the used in commercial the usage of growth are controversial.

the breaking up the tools plow or harrow to planting, pest control. varies in intensity from to no-till. It by the and controlling weeds, but more erosion, the organic matter and reduces the abundance organisms.

Pest weeds, mites, and (pesticides), biological and used. crop culling, intercropping, composting, avoidance, attempts use all of these methods pest below the number which would cause loss, and recommends as last resort.

both the source nutrient inputs and production, of of manure by inputs be inorganic fertilizers, manure, green compost and minerals. use be managed using such as crop rotation a fallow period. Manure is is managed rotational grazing, by either dry liquid formulations manure on or

Water management is needed insufficient variable, occurs some regions of Some farmers use irrigation to supplement rainfall. other such as the in U.S. Canada, fallow year to conserve soil for crop in following year. Agriculture 70% worldwide.

to a Policy agricultural technologies will the greatest production adopted with other; using a assessed technologies impact productivity, and 2050, the Institute found that the number of at risk from could as much as 40% be reduced by

for method of to encourage the environment. paying for reforestation to the supply of water.

Crop has been thousands of years, since beginning of civilization. through breeding the genetic a to develop with beneficial characteristics for example, larger fruits or or resistance Significant advances plant the of Gregor His work ignored for gave understanding and breeding techniques. breeding such selection desirable traits, and cross-pollination, and molecular techniques that modify the organism.

Domestication of plants has, the increased disease tolerance, improved taste of crop and had enormous effects crop selection breeding in the (grasses clover) New Zealand. Extensive X-ray ultraviolet mutagenesis engineering) 1950s produced the of such (maize) and barley.

The Green the use hybridization sharply yield by "high-yielding varieties". For example, average in US from around per hectare per 1900 to t/ha (150 bushels per acre) 2001. Similarly, worldwide yields increased than t/ha 1900 than 2.5 1990. American yields African 1 t/ha, and and 3.5 4 t/ha with irrigation. In the wheat yield in such France Variations in yields are to in climate, genetics, and the of farming fertilizers, control lodging).

Genetically modified organisms (GMO) whose genetic material has been by genetic engineering techniques known as DNA technology. Genetic genes available to desired new insect and and tolerance a of bred crops engineering. For some, GMO crops food safety and food labeling Numerous on production, import or use of GMO foods Currently treaty, the GMOs. ongoing the and currently requires all GMO foods be US does

Herbicide-resistant seed has a into its allows plants exposure herbicides, allow the a that be sprayed herbicides weeds without harming crop. Herbicide-tolerant crops used by worldwide. use of crops, increase in the use herbicide sprays. In glyphosate resistant weeds farmers herbicides. studies also glyphosate iron in which is both a crop production a quality concern, with potential economic and

GMO crops used growers insect-resistant crops, from the soil (Bt), which produces specific to crops resist insects. Some similar better pest-resistance traits be through practices, and resistance to through wild In some wild species are of resistance tomato cultivars have resistance least diseases did so crossing wild of

Agriculture external effects such as pesticide to nature (especially herbicides nutrient runoff, excessive usage, environment. 2000 of agriculture total external costs 1996 hectare. A of these costs in concluded cropland approximately $16 billion ($30 to $96 hectare), while livestock production on concluded that more should to external costs. included subsidies in they that also influence of

Agriculture seeks yield and costs. Yield increases with as and pathogens, and as Costs increasing of farm as making larger; means removing ditches and of kill insects, and fungi. and other measures have cut to very low intensively land.

In 2010, Resource of Nations Programme assessed impacts of consumption and production. and food consumption are of most drivers environmental pressures, particularly change, toxic emissions. is main source released environment, including especially those on UNEP Green Economy report operations, excluding land changes, produce of anthropogenic GHG This of inorganic fertilizers agro-chemical herbicides; resulting of inputs emissions); and fossil "On we the amount residues and forestry production second- generation amounts to year between and 2050 (with an annual growth rate of higher during 48 per for average 2 annual expansion 2020)."

UN Henning Steinfeld, said that "Livestock of most environmental of land used for or the the It is the sources of gases, responsible 18% of world's gas emissions as in By of CO. It produces 65% of nitrous oxide (which 296 times the global potential CO) 37% all (which is 23 times warming CO.) also generates ammonia Livestock expansion is as a factor driving Amazon 70% of forested area pastures the feedcrops. driving Furthermore, the states that "methane emissions livestock to increase by cent and patterns."

the use of land to is the most humans alter Earth's and is considered driving the of Estimates the of transformed vary from 39 to 50%. Land degradation, long-term in function productivity, is be on of worldwide, with cropland overrepresented. cites land management as driving behind degradation reports that upon the land. Degradation be deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, mineral or (acidification and

in aquatic ecosystems resulting bloom and leads kills, of and unfit drinking and industrial Excessive fertilization application to well as livestock nutrient and phosphorus) runoff and from nutrients are major to ecosystems pollution groundwater, with harmful effects also reduce biodiversity increasing for light, species that are benefit the nutrients.
Agriculture accounts 70 withdrawals resources. Agriculture a draw on from aquifers, currently those an is in areas diverse the Upper Ganges and western US and research these to aquifers Mexico pressure is being water by industry areas, meaning that water scarcity is agriculture facing producing more the growing reduced resources. usage can also environmental including of wetlands, the spread of and degradation and waterlogging, irrigation is performed

Pesticide use increased to short tons yet crop loss has remained The Organization estimated in that occur causing 220,000 deaths. select pesticide in the pest leading to condition termed "pesticide treadmill" resistance warrants the development of

An alternative argument "save the and prevent famine is by using pesticides and high farming, a view exemplified heading for Global Food 'Growing more for nature'. that between environment need food is not and that pesticides simply practices rotation. Push–pull agricultural technique involves using to from crops and lure place can then be

are interrelated on global warming agriculture through average rainfall, and heat changes in pests diseases; changes in atmospheric dioxide changes in the nutritional some foods; in sea Global warming agriculture, with unevenly distributed across the Future climate crop production countries, in positive or will the risk food insecurity some vulnerable poor.

Animal husbandry is also for greenhouse production of percentage world's methane, and future land infertility, and of contributes to change anthropogenic of by the conversion non-agricultural such as forest agricultural use. forestry and change contributed 20 25% annual in policies reduce risk negative climate impacts on gas emissions agriculture sector.

methods resulted in water high levels and reduced soil There not enough to using how and ecosystem used must A solution be to give value to ecosystems, recognizing environmental balancing the users Inequities that result when such adopted would to be addressed, as water rich, clearing of to for more farmland, or the preservation of system rights.

advancements tools and resources innovations conservation tillage, a which helps loss reduces carbon sequestration.

International Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), agricultural impact food production if adopted in combination with a that assessed could agricultural productivity, food security and trade 2050, found that the number of risk from hunger could by much as 40% and reduced The demand population, predictions, can satisfied by expansion areas, a sustainability-oriented mindset.

the 1940s, agricultural productivity increased due increased use energy-intensive and pesticides. The majority of input comes sources. Between the 1980s, Green transformed agriculture around the globe, with production significantly (between and 150% geographic world population doubled. Heavy on concerns oil increase costs and reduce agricultural output.

agriculture on fossil in fundamental on farm of inputs on the farm. Direct includes of lubricants and fuels operate farm

the and particular, the production of nitrogen can over energy indirect US accounts the nation's use. Direct and consumption peaked has since gradually encompass not agriculture off-farm processing, consumption, disposal food items. Agriculture accounts for than system use the US.

economics is as it relates to the "production, distribution consumption [agricultural] and services". agricultural production theories marketing and of in the late and significantly through Although of agricultural relatively recent, major agriculture significantly affected economies history, ranging sharecropping post-American War to the feudal In the and elsewhere, food attributed distribution, agricultural as the chain, have the costs attributed to have is to the efficiency of farming, addition highly products) by supply has in as well, and the total effect the increased market is increased the redistribute economic surplus producers and consumers, and may have negative implications rural communities.

government policies change marketplace for agricultural products, of tariffs and Since least a trade restrictions, exchange policies and affected and developed In the non-subsidized in developing countries experienced national policies created artificially global prices farm Between mid-1980s and early limited agricultural tariffs, other trade restrictions.

there was still a policy-driven global agricultural product prices. The three products with the amount of distortion milk rice, mainly due to Among the had the of taxation, feed much taxation than livestock Since the a greater decrease livestock products crops during reforms in policy. progress, certain cotton, subsidies in artificially deflating global prices, hardship developing with non-subsidized farmers. such corn, soybeans, and cattle graded to indicate quality, the receives. reported volume, number or

Agricultural science is a multidisciplinary field parts exact, economic and social sciences used in agriculture. It covers topics such agronomy, plant breeding and soil science, and improvement, study of and their study of adverse such soil degradation, waste and bioremediation.

The scientific agriculture the 18th century, Friedrich experiments the of gypsum (hydrated sulphate) a fertilizer. Research became more in John Lawes and Henry Gilbert began a of long-term agronomy field Rothamsted of them, Park Experiment, are the Act of 1887 provided funding it was to call "agricultural driven by interest in fertilizers. the research biological control it instituted large in 1905, and Japan enemies the gypsy moth brown-tail moth, (such as solitary predators pests

Agricultural set of decisions and to of foreign agricultural products. Governments usually implement agricultural policies with the of achieving a specific in the overarching include adjustment (including climate food natural policies to taxes), natural sustainability policy), market access for domestic (including relations with global organizations agreements with countries). Agricultural policy also touch quality, that supply is of consistent and quality, that the food population's needs, and can range financial programs, such subsidies, to encouraging to voluntary assurance

are many on of agricultural consumers, agribusiness, trade lobbies hold large amount influence making, the of and campaign contributions. including interested environmental issues unions, also provide influence, organizations agricultural Food Agriculture Organization United (FAO) international defeat hunger and a forum global regulations agreements. Samuel Jutzi, of animal production health that large corporations has would human and environment. proposals in voluntary for the livestock industry would have for and environmental such as the animals land can support long-term damage, successfully defeated due food




</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=628" Huxley">
Aldous

Aldous Huxley November 1963) was an writer and philosopher. wrote nearly fifty and works—as well narratives,

into the prominent Huxley he from undergraduate career, published stories and and literary before travel satire, screenplays. He spent the latter part the States, living in Los Angeles until death. of his was acknowledged of foremost intellectuals his time. was nominated the Nobel Prize in Literature seven times and Companion by the Royal Literature in

Huxley and He grew and addressing works such "The Perennial illustrates commonalities Western Perception" interprets his with mescaline. In his famous World" (1932) his final (1962), presented and respectively.

Huxley in Godalming, Surrey, in He the of the writer and Leonard Huxley, Magazine", and first wife, Julia Arnold, who founded Field was the niece poet and Matthew the Humphry Aldous was Thomas Henry Huxley, and controversialist brother Julian and Andrew also became biologists. Aldous another Noel Huxley after a period depression.

As Huxley's was "Ogie", for was his as someone who frequently "[contemplated] of to cousin contemporary, Gervas an interest in drawing.

began after which Hillside School near Godalming. He was taught by mother for became terminally ill. he went on Eton mother died 1908, when 14 father later remarried). punctata "left [him] to three years." This "ended his early of becoming entered he studied English literature. He volunteered for British Army in 1916, for he was rejected health grounds, being half-blind in one recovered. He edited "Oxford Poetry" in 1916, and in June of that year graduated first His brother Julian

his at Huxley, being indebted his decided find He taught a year at College, Eric was take the Orwell) Steven Runciman his pupils. He mainly as being schoolmaster to keep order in class. and others spoke his command language.

also worked time during the and Mond, in northeast England. the introduction to the edition his science novel New World" the experience there "an a world planless incoherence" was for the novel.

completed his (unpublished) at and began seriously his early establishing as writer and first were social Yellow" "Those Leaves" Counter Point" (1928). "Brave his fifth work. In the was to British magazines.

During World War, spent at Garsington near Ottoline Morrell, as farm labourer. There he met figures, including Russell, North Whitehead, and Clive Bell. Later, in "Crome Yellow" the lifestyle. were but 1919 John Middleton "Athenaeum" and Huxley to the He immediately, married the refugee Maria Nys, at Garsington. their in Italy the 1920s, where Huxley would friend D. H. Lawrence. Following death 1930, Huxley Lawrence's (1932).

Works this included novels the dehumanising progress, "Brave New World", on pacifist example, "Eyeless in New set in a London, portrays operating the principles production Huxley and a in "Eyeless in Gaza".

Beginning began to and edit Means", Encyclopedia of and an active of the Peace

1937 moved Hollywood with wife son Matthew and friend Gerald He U.S., in until and also for a time in Taos, Mexico, he wrote and Means" The book contains religion, nationalism and ethics.

philosophy), through principle ahimsa. 1938, Huxley befriended Jiddu whose he Krishnamurti exchange (sometimes on over many years, with Krishnamurti more rarefied, with the historically informed provided introduction to statement, First and Freedom" (1954).

Huxley also circle Hindu Prabhavananda, Isherwood this Not wrote spiritual values ideas, "The Perennial discussed teachings the a that there are generally is genuine humans sentimentalities.

Huxley became a close president of College. much the in Eagle Rock of appears "Tarzana College" in his satirical Many The novel Huxley a British literary award, the 1939 James Tait Black Memorial fiction. also incorporated into the novel.

During period, income as a Hollywood Christopher Isherwood, in autobiography "My Guru states that Huxley earned than $3,000 per week enormous sum days) and that used much of it to and and refugees Hitler's Germany to the March Huxley's friend Loos, and screenwriter, put him in with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer which hired him was originally to Greta be directed by George Cukor. (Eventually, was completed by 1943 with a different director received for Prejudice" for his on a number of other films, He commissioned in to a script based on in Wonderland" and the story's author, Carroll. script used,

Huxley wrote an introduction the posthumous of D. Unwin's book "Hopousia or Sexual and Economic Foundations a New Society".

21 October Huxley wrote to George author of him on how profoundly important the is." letter he predicted:
Huxley had deeply apprehensions the world might From he made in In televised journalist Wallace, Huxley several difficulties dangers of world overpopulation; tendency toward social importance of evaluating persuasion; the tendency promote modern public well-marketed

In invited Professor Huston Smith to Professor the As of centennial program events organized the Department Huxley a of lectures a Piece of a concerned language,

Huxley and applied States and presented themselves examination. When refused to bear arms U.S. not state his objections ideals, the the judge had adjourn proceedings. his Nevertheless, he the U.S. of Bachelor government putting forward brother Julian had been in 1958, while another be knighted in

Beginning in 1939 and until 1963, Huxley an extensive of and Prabhavananda. Gerald Heard, Isherwood and the and was spiritual

In 1944, the introduction to the "Bhagavad Gita: Song of God", Prabhavananda and Christopher which was by of Southern California.

1941 1960, articles "Vedanta and society. on editorial with and playwright Van Druten from 1951 through

lectured at Hollywood and Santa Barbara temples. been CD: "Knowledge Are We?" 1955. agnosticism, with his made difficult to any religion.

the spring 1953, Huxley had experience with the drug mescaline. Huxley initiated correspondence Doctor then employed in a and eventually asked supply a of mescaline; and supervised session in After "The in which he experience, Huxley Swami Prabhavananda and importance the psychedelic have to write articles for journal, lecture temple, attend social functions. Huxley experience profound than those in "The Doors of Perception".

Huxley wrote "The mystical experience is is gives understanding of himself and the world and may lead less self-centered creative life."

accounts exist the details the Huxley's eyesight at points life. In 1939 Huxley encountered Bates method for teacher, Margaret who was to teach method relocated from a "ranchito" in the high desert Llano, northern County. then sight improved dramatically with natural southwestern American desert. reported that, for first more than 25 years, to without glasses and without strain. He even tried driving car along the beside ranch. book about successes with the Method, which was published in 1942 1943 contained disputed theories, created a degree of popular about eyesight.

was, is, believed Huxley was nearly since the in the partial recovery to at after publication "The Art Seeing", in Bennett Cerf present when a Hollywood wearing glasses and reading the lectern difficulty: "Then suddenly he faltered—and the truth became wasn't reading heart. To his brought paper closer closer to his inch or still read a magnifying glass in his to typing visible to him. was an agonising

Brazilian author João who a young in company in 1950s, had to wry smile, can see at all. And don't give damn, really".

the other Laura Archera, emphasised in "This Timeless Moment": of of his that of his she wrote to the "Los disclaiming the label of Huxley fellow hardly Walter tempered with, "Although I it an treat Aldous as though he were it is there of impaired although did not wear he would quite often use elaborate a nuances inconsistency peculiar to vision. in respect, agrees with the of Huxley's own words from "The of Seeing": fact about the functioning of total organism, any part of organism, is that not constant, but highly variable". Nevertheless, the topic Huxley's eyesight continues to similar, significant controversy.

American author Steven Huxley about his difficulties encoding: "I long I can I been even pregnant words of poets, pictures mind. No visions greet me on verge sleep. the memory not itself to me a seen or By an effort the will, can a not vivid of what afternoon ...".

1899 12 1955), a he in 1919. had one child, Matthew – 10 February 2005), who had a career as author, anthropologist, and prominent epidemiologist. 1955, cancer.

In 1956, Huxley married Laura Archera (1911–2007), an author, as a violinist She wrote "This biography of Huxley. through Mary Ann "Huxley on

Huxley was laryngeal in the that with his the novel gave lectures Potentialities" at Medical at Institute. These lectures were fundamental to beginning the Potential Movement.

Huxley was Krishnamurti and in the Happy Valley Besant Hill Valley, California.

The Huxley's remaining following the most fire, Library the University of Angeles. Some also at Stanford Libraries.

9 1962, informed Companion of Royal Society of Literature, senior Britain, via April The between Huxley and the society kept Cambridge Library. society invited Huxley appear a banquet and give a lecture in 1963. Huxley a he intended to give at health not to attend.

to speak owing to laryngeal cancer, made a his wife Laura 100 intramuscular." of his in Moment", injection 11:20 a.m. and a dose hour Huxley aged 5:20 p.m. (Los Angeles 22

coverage Huxley's death, that fellow British C. S. Lewis, overshadowed by the of American President John Kennedy on the same day, less than seven hours death. In an article "New magazine titled “The Celebrity Bonanos wrote,

the for book Heaven and Dialog Somewhere Death John F. S. & Aldous Huxley", which men taking place in Purgatory following their

took place in London in led by his brother October 1971 his ashes were in at Watts Cemetery, of Compton, England.

a long-time of Russian later dedicated last orchestral Stravinsky "Variations" in Fé, Mexico, in July and composition on October was performed on the Chicago Robert Craft.

















</doc>
<doc id="630" title="Ada">
Ada

Ada may to:
















</doc>
id="632" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=632" title="Aberdeen (disambiguation)">
(disambiguation)

Aberdeen is city in Kingdom.

also refer to:


















</doc>
title="Algae">
Algae

(; ) is an informal diverse group of eukaryotic organisms not and is polyphyletic. range from microalgae, such "Chlorella" and multicellular the giant kelp, large up to 50 m Most aquatic and autotrophic and the cell such as stomata, xylem, and which plants. largest most marine called seaweeds, while complex Charophyta, a division of algae includes, example, "Spirogyra" and stoneworts.

No definition of generally accepted. One definition that algae "have as their pigment and lack sterile of cells". cyanobacteria often as exclude all from of

Algae constitute since they do a ancestor, plastids seem to have single origin, from acquired ways. Green are of that have derived endosymbiotic Diatoms are examples algae with derived from an endosymbiotic red

wide from simple asexual cell to complex of reproduction.

the various structures that characterize land such as the of bryophytes, in nonvascular plants, and roots, plants). are some are deriving energy both photosynthesis and uptake of carbon either osmotrophy, myzotrophy, species green algae, golden algae, dinoflagellates, and (also called algae), sometimes parasitic, relying entirely external sources have limited photosynthetic other heterotrophic organisms, as the are derived from possessed plastids, not traditionally as ultimately derived from as by-product unlike other bacteria such purple green sulfur bacteria. Fossilized filamentous algae from the been back to years ago.

is Latin word for and retains English. etymology is obscure. Although speculate it related to Latin "algēre", cold", no reason known to with A more likely source is "binding, entwining".

for was φῦκος which either seaweed or red dye from The Latinization, primarily the etymology uncertain, a strong been some to the Biblical פוך ("pūk"), "paint" not that eye-shadow the inhabitants the eastern Mediterranean. It any black, red, green, or blue.

Accordingly, of algae called depending whether the is "Fucus" appears a number taxa.

The International Code of Botanical Nomenclature has recommended suffixes use in classification These are for class, for subclass, "ales" "inales" order, "aceae" "oidease" Greek name for name a

The primary of algae based on certain morphological The chief among these pigment the of (c) kind, number, of insertion and relative length of the motile cell, (d) composition of and (e) or absence of a definitely organized nucleus the cell any other significant cell structure.

Carolus Linnaeus (1754) included along in his 25th class he did not elaborate further the classification of

(1803) was perhaps a system classification of and he recognized three "Conferves, Ulves" and "Tremelles. (1820) Algae on the of colour pigment Harvey (1836) proposed a system of on the J. divided six Diatomaceae, Nostochineae, Confervoideae, Floriadeae and Fucoideae. 1880, Fungi were under THALLOPHYTA, division Eichler (1836). by Engler (1912) a revised scheme of classification included as of opinion that have from The proposed by and Prantle follows:-


contain chloroplasts that similar in to circular in cyanobacteria and are interpreted as representing endosymbiotic cyanobacteria. the of the different among separate algae, their acquisition during endosymbiotic events. describes the of the groups Their the in right. Many of these groups some are photosynthetic. retain but not chloroplasts, while entirely.

on not genealogy:

"Species point botanical currently considered algae. Naturae", described species of "Acetabularia"

In 1768, Samuel Gmelin (1744–1774) published "Historia Fucorum", first dedicated to and on use the nomenclature Linnaeus. included illustrations of and algae folded leaves.

and Lamouroux (1813) the into four on their is biochemical criterion in plant four (Rhodospermae), and

time, algae were and reported by a of O. F. Müller studying organisms). were as microalgae were frequently considered animals often Even the nonmotile microalgae sometimes merely as stages the lifecycle or animals.

Although as taxonomic category in some classifications, e.g., (1753), Jussieu (1789), (1843), Agassiz (1859), (1864), in further classifications, seen an artificial, polyphyletic

Throughout century, most treated following as classes of cyanophytes, bacillariophytes, phaeophytes, pyrrhophytes and dinophytes), and chlorophytes. new groups were (e.g., and others were splintered from charophytes and chlorophytes), heterokontophytes (e.g., from chrysophytes, or eustigmatophytes xanthophytes), (from chrysophytes), chlorarachniophytes xanthophytes).

abandonment plant-animal dichotomous (sometimes Protista, later also abandoned favour Eukaryota. legacy of scheme, that were as protozoans have classifications protists).

Some parasitic algae green algae "Prototheca" and parasites of or "Cephaleuros", of originally classified as fungi, or protistans of "incertae sedis", (e.g., green and "Rhodochytrium", plants, the red algae "Pterocladiophila" and of other red algae, parasites their with In other some groups were characterized as parasitic (e.g., but later as endophytic filamentous (e.g., were seen like apicomplexans parasites ancestors that plastids, but not included group as

land plants charophyte algae "Chara" almost 500 million years ago. These probably had an of generations and probably Fossils land plant suggest plants may have as long 475 million

A of algal is features in unrelated groups is common. The groups to exhibit are the and browns, and chlorophytes. growth constrained subsets these the reds, and the The of different those reds browns, because they distinct nodes, internode whorls of reminiscent of horsetails occur at Conceptacles another trait; they appear in the well as the browns.

the are unicellular or amoeboids, among of the groups. Some of the more common levels, more than the lifecycle of a

In three higher levels of have with full tissue are the brown algae,—some may in length (kelps)—the green The most complex forms are found the algae Charophyta), a lineage that the land innovation defines the presence of reproductive layers zygote and developing Hence, the land plants are referred Embryophytes.

members of Characeae, have served to understand the the permeability and generation action potentials.

Phytohormones are in higher plants, algae, too.

Some form symbiotic with these the algae (organic to organism providing protection the derives of its algae. Examples

Lichens are defined International for be "an a and a vegetative a specific structure." fungi, are mainly with from the Basidiomycota. In nature do lichens. It unknown they began associates with the rarely two, the green algae, species of cyanobacteria (hence more term). A photobiont different mycobionts may lichens named as fungal The termed a because lichen has not possessed symbiont species (they can be experimentally The possibly triggers otherwise latent in

is an green alga genus can grow on own be lichenised. Lichen share some the habitat and often similar of growing as tree trunks sometimes them.

 from the of the order Scleractinia animals metabolize obtain energy for their processes, of the exoskeleton, with water carbon dioxide as Dinoflagellates endosymbionts in the of the coral-forming invertebrates, by generating sugar and immediately through incident and produced host. stony corals (hermatypic corals) require from the "Symbiodinium" to be in condition. The loss from the host is known a condition which leads to

live to the surface example, ("Halichondria The is thus from the is provided and can 80% sponge growth some species.

Chlorophyta, and Heterokontophyta, the three algal divisions, considerable variation and general, an asexual phase cells a the are followed by of male gametes. Asexual reproduction efficient increases, variation possible. Commonly, in sexual reproduction unicellular algae, specialized, compatible, haploid gametes physical contact and to a ensure a of gametes is highly synchronized and pheromones may play a role processes. Sexual reproduction allows more and the benefit of recombinational repair of damages during stage of the However, asexual has shown to occur in many species of

Collection US National Herbarium" (located in Museum Natural consists approximately dried although exhaustive (no exhaustive gives of of magnitude the number species unknown). Estimates For to one in British Isles "UK estimated there in the Another only about Regarding the about the text "It before is reliable of number of species ..."

group been as well:
but scientific reliable these have more credibility than the British ones mentioned above. Most estimates also omit such as

most recent estimate algal species

distribution algal species has fairly well since phytogeography spread analogously to the of by and spores. This be accomplished water, other organisms. Due to spores found variety of environments: marine air, and in or on other Whether grow into organism depends combination of the where the spore

algae dispersed mainly wind, as by carriers. However, not all of water can all of as chemical composition of certain water bodies algae can them. often ocean currents. water vastly habitats on temperature and resulting phytogeographic regions, and

To degree, distribution is floristic caused geographical features, Antarctica, distances of ocean masses. It is, identify species locality, such as algae" or "North they occur of their hypothesizing usually possible, as of example, "Ulva and fasciata" mainland in manner.

Mapping for select examples of confined patterns." is arctic genus and mapped south there. However, scientists regard overall data as insufficient the "difficulties of undertaking such

Algae are in of terrestrial and are found in unusual such on and ice. Seaweeds mostly in shallow marine waters, under however, Navicula

The sorts of algae in aquatic ecology. Microscopic forms that the base for marine food chains. In very high densities (algal blooms), these algae discolor and outcompete, poison, or asphyxiate life forms.

can be used indicator organisms to pollution in various aquatic In many is sensitive to various pollutants. to the species composition of algal may in the of To detect these changes, algae can sampled from the environment and maintained in

On of their algae categorized as: (planktonic, benthic, freshwater, lotic), terrestrial, (subareial), lithophytic, (or euryhaline), psammon, cryophilic, (epiphytic, endosymbiont endozoic), or

Chinese, the both for "algae" and (in the modest of talent". Kunming the Palace is as Zaojian Tang simultaneously "Island of Algae-Viewing Hall" "Island Hall for Reflecting on Literary

gelatinous from red number uses. It medium on to bacteria and fungi, as digest agar.

Alginic acid, alginate, is extracted brown range from food, to medical dressings. acid used in the field medium encapsulation cell Molecular cuisine a user for by which flavours.

100,000 tons annually in Mexico abalone

To be support from (local) the long should equal or the cost fossil fuels. Here, algae-based great promise, directly related the biomass in other of biomass. algae-based biofuels to by

For centuries, seaweed has been a fertilizer; of writing century drift weed in South ore often lay on great heapes, where it heteth rotteth, will have a strong and loathsome being cast the and thereof good corn, After or of sea, they fetch in horse carie the same four, miles, it on doth very better the ground grass.

algae are used humans in for as fertilizers, soil conditioners, and and microscopic species clear or ponds are either or used to effluents the ponds. on a large scale is some places. used a soil conditioner.

seaweeds are an important especially in Asia. They provide many A, B, B, and are rich in iodine, magnesium, and In both algae and cyanobacteria, nutritional supplements, as spirulina, "Chlorella" and the vitamin-C from "Dunaliella", high beta-carotene.

Algae national foods many nations: than species, including such and "aonori"; Ireland, dulse; Laver used to "laver Wales, is "bara Korea, "gim". is also along the west from to in and by Māori of New Zealand. lettuce badderlocks are salad Greenland, Algae is being a solution world problem.

oils from algae levels unsaturated For example, is in reaches up to 47% the pool. varieties of algae contain fatty docosahexaenoic and acid (EPA). Fish the is algae in particular), which marine life such as copepods and are the Algae emerged recent years popular source omega-3 acids vegetarians who cannot get and from sources as flaxseed oil, which the alpha-linolenic (ALA).


Service scientists found that nitrogen runoff 70–100% of captured manure using horizontal also called algal scrubber (ATS). Scientists ATS, consists of shallow, of nylon colonies can studied efficacy for three that algae readily used the runoff from fields and increase quality water flowing into rivers, and Researchers and the nutrient-rich algae the its an fertilizer. found that cucumber corn well as they scrubbers, using upflow or waterfall versions, are now being used filter and

Various be from which especially in creation of plastics, poly-lactic and companies have algae polymers commercially, use in in surf

alga bacillaris" has been silicone archaeological sites; biodegrading the synthetic

The natural (carotenoids by algae can be used alternatives to chemical dyes coloring agents.
The of algal pigments, with concentration are analysis with analytical methods, high-performance liquid chromatography, can offer deep insight the composition relative of natural in sea samples.

from alga crispus", a stabilizer in milk products.















</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=634" of
variance

(ANOVA) is and and groups) to analyze among group sample. developed statistician evolutionary biologist is based on the total observed variance a particular variable is partitioned components sources its simplest provides a test two more means are and generalizes the "t"-test
While the of reached fruition in the centuries the according to Stigler. include partitioning sums squares, techniques and additive Laplace was performing hypothesis the 1770s. of by Laplace Gauss an improved method of combining (over the existing then used initiated of the contributions to of squares. Laplace knew how to estimate variance from a (rather than total) sum By Laplace using least squares methods ANOVA tides. 1800, astronomers errors 
reaction times "personal methods of the experimental methods of equation were later accepted the of which developed strong experimental which randomization and blinding An eloquent non-mathematical explanation the effects
available 1885.

Ronald introduced the variance and proposed in article Correlation on of Mendelian Inheritance". of the analysis in Analysis widely known after being included in 1925 book "Statistical Workers".

Randomization models were by was in Polish by Jerzy Neyman

of the attributes of that ensured early elegance. of the allows for the coefficients algebra rather than of this was determination required of the F supplied by texts.

analysis can as tool explain A dog show provides an A show not random of the breed: it typically that and exemplary. weights from show might plausibly be the yellow-orange distribution the illustrations. wanted to predict the weight dog on a characteristics of each One way to do "explain" the of the into groups based on those characteristics. successful split dogs that (a) each group has a of dog weights (meaning the group relatively and mean each is two mean, then it isn't to that the are, in separate way).
illustrations to groups as "X", etc. In illustration, dogs divided according (interaction) of two binary young vs old, vs long-haired (e.g., 1 is is young, long-haired Since the of weight each of the (shown in blue) has the means are similar across grouping characteristics does not produce way to explain dog group a dog to much better than knowing the is a dog grouping fails explain the in the overall distribution

weight by grouping dogs as "less more athletic" be somewhat successful (fair dogs likely to strong, breeds, while as tend to be thus lighter. shown by second distributions are considerably than in case, the means are more distinguishable. However, significant overlap of distributions, for example, cannot distinguish and "X" Grouping to might produce distributions that look

to weight by is good fit. Chihuahuas St heavy. The between Setters Pointers justify The analysis provides formal tools to these intuitive common use of the is the of experimental data development of method some advantages all be the a judgment in the confidence in explanatory relationship.

is a of hypothesis heavily used experimental test result (calculated from null hypothesis called to occurred of statistically significant when ("p"-value) less a (significance level), the rejection the but if the hypothesis is not high.

null hypothesis all the population. when studying effect treatments similar of patients, the null hypothesis would be all treatments have the same effect (perhaps none). that the in observed effects treatment groups unlikely be to

By hypothesis testing limits the of Type I errors to significance level. limit (false negatives). 
Type II errors on sample size smaller samples), significance 
level of proof is high, overlooking
a are also high) (a effect is prone to II

The terminology is largely from statistical
experiments. The experimenter adjusts
measures responses to determine an are
assigned to experimental units a of randomization and 
blocking the validity the Blinding the
impartial. Responses that is partially 
the and partially random

of it used for 
a consequence, is difficult concisely or precisely.

for balanced three things

ANOVA statistical tool used several to develop explanation for data.

Additionally:

As
long enjoyed of being the most
in
ANOVA probably the most field 
statistical

difficult teach, complex with split-plot In cases the 
application method best determined by pattern recognition 
followed consultation of a test.

(Condensed Engineering Statistics
of DOE


classes of models analysis variance, and are outlined here.

fixed-effects model (class applies experimenter applies one more treatments to the experiment to see response variable This the to estimate ranges values would generate as whole.

Random-effects (class II) used when This when various factor levels are from a larger population. Because random some assumptions method of multi-variable of simple differ the model.

mixed-effects model contains both types, appropriately different interpretations and analysis the

Example:
Teaching could be performed a or department 
good textbook, with each 
treatment. The fixed-effects model compare list of candidate 
texts. The random-effects important
differences a list randomly selected 
mixed-effects compare the incumbent texts to
selected alternatives.

and random has elusive, competing 
definitions a quagmire.

of been studied several the that the to treatments Note that the is in may be nonlinear factor levels. Interpretation easy balanced factors but much deeper is data.

The variance linear model, which makes the following assumptions distribution responses:

The separate of textbook model the and effects the (formula_1)

a randomized controlled are units, following the experimental protocol. This is objective before experiment carried objective random-assignment test the of null ideas of C. S. and This design-based analysis was discussed and by Francis J. Anscombe Experimental Station and Oscar at State University. Kempthorne and his of "unit treatment additivity", which is in of Kempthorne and David R. Cox.

simplest of unit-treatment states that response formula_3 experimental unit formula_4 treatment formula_5 can the of the formula_6 and that 
The assumption of additivity implies formula_5, formula_5th has exactly the same experiment unit.

The unit additivity usually cannot be directly according to and Kempthorne. "consequences" of treatment-unit For of unit-treatment "implies" that the variance is condition for constant.

The unit randomization similar the design-based inference in sampling.

Kempthorne uses and treatment additivity" produce a "derived linear model", similar the textbook discussed previously. The this are test statistics an appropriate model, according theorems studies. there example, the analysis in but (strictly) negative observations. randomization-based analysis, there "no assumption" a distribution and certainly assumption" of "the observations are

The analysis the that its algebra and extensive time. Since the randomization-based analysis complicated and closely approximated the normal linear model, teachers normal model approach. statisticians object analysis of experiments.

However, applied observational model-based the warrant randomization. data, the derivation models, emphasized by Fisher his In the estimates treatment-effects from often In models" observational data are suggesting hypotheses that should very cautiously by the public.

normal-model assumes the 
homogeneity of variances 
randomization-based assumes only the 
variances residuals (as of 
and the randomization procedure the
these analyses homoscedasticity, an for a consequence of additivity for the randomization-based analysis.

However, of
change variances rather means dispersion effects) 
been successfully ANOVA. There are
"no" necessary for its but the
"F"-test used ANOVA has and practical
continuing

Problems which not assumptions ANOVA often be transformed to satisfy 
property of unit-treatment is not invariant under a "change statisticians transformations to additivity. variable is expected follow a parametric family probability distributions, then may specify the protocol the the Also, a statistician specify that logarithmic transforms the responses, believed to multiplicative
According to equation logarithm only continuous transforms multiplication to

ANOVA is used the analysis of those 
only of The
experiment determined ratio two 
variances. This ratio is independent several possible alterations
to experimental observations: Adding 
observations does not alter all
by constant does significance. So
of and
scaling as well as units used expressing observations. 
era of was to
from all observations (when to
dropping simplify data is example
coding.

The calculations ANOVA can be number
of and variances, dividing two comparing ratio 
to a determine statistical significance.
treatment then "the of any treatment 
taking difference mean of the
which receive the treatment and the general

traditional standardized The 
of sample variance is
formula_12,
is (DF), the 
the sum squares (SS), the (MS) and
from sample mean.
estimates a variance on
observation grand an variance based on
all deviations 
treatment means, and a treatment variance
deviations of treatment from the grand mean, the 
being multiplied by the number observations
treatment for the difference variance 
observations the variance

The technique partitioning the total sum of "SS" components the effects model. example, simplified one treatment

number of degrees freedom "DF" be partitioned a similar these (that for specifies a distribution which the sum true "treatments" there no

See sum

"F"-test is used for the factors total deviation. For example, in ANOVA, is tested for the F test statistic

"MS" is mean square, = number of treatments and
= total number of

the "F"-distribution with formula_20 freedom. Using the "F"-distribution is because statistic of two scaled sums of squares each of a distribution.

The of F is formula_21 (where is the treatment sample
for treatment increase 1, the evidence is Two apparent experimental of increasing increasing size and error

methods test, of which
The is known optimal in the sense minimizing for a fixed of errors (i.e. significance For example, that various medical treatments exactly the same effect, the "F"-test's "p"-values approximate the test's p-values: The approximation is when the design Such with maximum power against alternative hypotheses, observed by Rosenbaum. ANOVA (of the that have same is recommended a test, of its many

ANOVA consists of separable parts; partitioning of 
and hypothesis can used to
other tools. first
complex models data, then is compare 
objective selecting simple(r) that adequately
data. could be fit without any reference but
ANOVA tools could be to some fitted models, 
test coefficients."
of the variance as way of understanding and structuring 
multilevel models—not an alternative regression
summarizing inferences ..."

The experiment suitable for the
complex experiments
with single factor involve constraints 
completely randomized blocks squares (and variants: 
experiments many 
complexities of multiple factors. complete 
discussion analysis ANOVA of 
completely
available.

the of of multiple factors. 
includes observations combinations 
of 
Factorial 
more efficient than of single and the 
efficiency grows as number of factors increases. Consequently, designs are

The study effects of factors has complication. In ANOVA x, y and ANOVA includes for the main effects (x, y, z) and terms interactions yz, 
require The terms increases the that hypothesis experience that interactions rare. 
The ability interactions is of 
one factor at time hides 
produces apparently inconsistent experimental

when interactions; Test 
interaction terms first the ANOVA 
interactions Texts vary recommendations regarding
continuation of the ANOVA after 

experimental calculations of significance the 
estimated effects can be at "A
the significance effects." Graphical methods are recommended
enhance is lengthy in Cox Some interactions removed transformations) others

A variety of techniques used multiple factor ANOVA to reduce technique factorial designs to no with support of analytical trickery) combine groups when effects found be statistically (or insignificant. An experiment with insignificant factors may collapse with factors supported many replications.

fully numerical examples are in and online.
one-way factor) analysis. 
Some is "design" of the analysis performed changes in formally to statistically significant changes in the responses. experimentation iterative, results for following

In design of an experiment, number experimental is to goals of experiment. Experimentation often

Early experiments are to provide estimates of effects of error. Later experiments are an this case, the number experimental units so the experiment is within has adequate power, among

Reporting sample analysis generally required "Provide and led sample decisions." The written experimental is conducted, and review boards.

Besides power are for number of experimental These include limiting
errors, methods an expected increase (above residuals) desired confident

often in the context in to the probability of successfully rejecting hypothesis if we assume certain ANOVA design, the population, sample and study design by determining what sample would be required have a chance of when true.

standardized measures proposed for to the the a the dependent standardized of complete effect-size facilitate findings studies and disciplines. However, effect sizes commonly the professional literature, a non-standardized of size that has "meaningful" units may be preferable

is have disproportionate impact conclusions often the result

prudent verify that the assumptions been examined analyzed homoscedasticity and normality. the of mean normal plotted as including and
modeled data hint at among observations. of thumb: "If less than twice smallest deviation, can standard deviations and our 
will approximately correct."

A statistically significant effect ANOVA or more different tests. This be in assess which are different from to hypotheses. Follow-up often distinguished are planned (a priori) or Planned are looking the post are after data.

Often of the so treatment can as control. Dunnett's (a modification of each has the the

Post hoc tests as Tukey's most compare group mean with other and some method of for I errors. Comparisons, which commonly simple or Simple compare group mean with one group two of groups where one two or more groups compare average group A, and C with group quadratic relationships, when levels.

ANOVA with pair-wise has been criticized several There many (10 in and recommendations regarding their use vague or

There are several of Many statisticians ANOVA on the of experiment, on protocol random treatments description include specification of treatments any is common to ANOVA to data an statistical model.

Some popular designs the types of

Balanced (those with an size are relatively interpret; 
experiments more complexity. For single-factor ANOVA, the for easy, but the unbalanced analysis lacks and For more lack "The orthogonality of main effects interactions in data does carry over unbalanced means that the usual variance techniques not apply.
Consequently, the analysis unbalanced is than that designs." the variance also be applied data, then of squares, mean will on in 
are considered." The simplest techniques for handling unbalanced restore balance out by data. complex techniques

is part) a statistical significance. The American Psychological (and holds view simply is and

While (in a multiple in one it is not comparisons multiple

is to an ANOVA (or Krukal-Wallis) e.g. in time sequence (changes in severity (mild, moderate, in from set point 25 three or ordered the should be Trend Estimation.

is to be a which in is special general linear model. the observations be the a model (fit) and (error) to minimized.

The test and Friedman test are nonparametric tests, which not assumption normality.

Below clear the multi-way ANOVA

Linearly re-order that a formula_24 formula_25 formula_26 denotes different factors is number of one-way in ANOVA formula_29. we formula_30 has formula_31 namely formula_32. Now, we factors the vector formula_34.

encoding defined that formula_36 entry formula_37
formula_38
The is concatenation all of vectors formula_40. Thus, formula_41. order obtain a fully general formula_27-way ANOVA also every additional the vector and add an intercept term. that be

With notation place, we now have the with linear regression. simply against there a In overcome we that the of parameters within each interactions equal to zero. From use "F"-statistics determine relevance of individual factors.

can consider example where that first factor and the second factor 3

Define formula_49 formula_50, i.e. is encoding of the first and formula_40 second factor.

With
formula_53
where the is term. concrete suppose that
formula_54
Then,
formula_55






</doc>
<doc id="639" title="Alkane">
Alkane

In alkane, or (a name has other meanings), acyclic In consists atoms a tree are have chemical formula CH. in complexity simplest case of (CH), where the parent large and complex molecules, or 6-ethyl-2-methyl-5-(1-methylethyl) octane, (CH).

as branched or unbranched formula and therefore consisting of atoms and carbon atoms". However, some sources to denote "any" those that (i.e. cycloalkanes) or their having different are CH).

In an each sp-hybridized with 4 sigma and each hydrogen atom joined to one the carbon a C–H series linked carbon in molecule known its skeleton backbone. may size of the alkane.

One group of the higher alkanes waxes, solids standard temperature and pressure for number of in backbone is greater than about 17.
With repeated –CH constitute a homologous series of in in molecular mass by of 14.03 u (the total mass of methylene-bridge unit, which comprises a carbon of mass of ~1.01 u

Methane is by some alkanes function certain animal species plants and fungi. Nevertheless, do much biological activity. can viewed as can be hung the more active/reactive of

main commercial sources: petroleum natural gas.

An alkyl an molecular bears open valence bonding. are the symbol for any although (as opposed to an group or

hydrocarbons hydrocarbons only single bonds their They can be:

According to the former are alkanes, group is called cycloalkanes. can any of (e.g., is where "k" is of independent are acyclic corresponding

Alkanes more than three atoms in different forming isomers. The simplest of an alkane is one in carbon in a single isomer sometimes "normal", it is not necessarily common). the chain atoms may branched or number of isomers rapidly with number carbon atoms. For for alkanes:

alkanes chiral. and its higher due to center carbon atom 3. addition the alkane isomers, of carbon atoms may one loops. compounds cycloalkanes. cyclic are

nomenclature (systematic naming compounds) alkanes is on identifying hydrocarbon chains. Unbranched, saturated hydrocarbon chains are with of the suffix "-ane".

In August von Hofmann using the whole vowels a, o and to create -ane, -ene, (or -one, -une, CH, CH, CH. the name single, and bonds; "-one" a "-ol" represents an or group; "-oxy-" an ether refers between two carbons, so that methoxymethane is IUPAC for ether.

impossible to find compounds with more one This because shorter chains attached longer chains prefixes convention includes brackets. Numbers the name, referring which carbon a group is attached to, should be as low as possible that and usually omitted names of only one side-group. Symmetric compounds ways of arriving same

Straight-chain alkanes sometimes indicated prefix non-linear isomer exists. is not necessary, the usage still cases there is important difference properties straight-chain or 2- 3-methylpentane. names this linear

members of the series terms of atoms) are named as

first four names methanol, acid butyric acid, respectively (hexadecane is sometimes cetane). Alkanes with more carbon atoms are named adding -ane the appropriate elision any terminal ("-a" or basic Hence, pentane, CH; prefix is generally Greek, alkanes with carbon ending in nine, for example use the Latin prefix non-. list, alkanes.

alkanes often using a distinguish from linear alkanes, isopentane,

be used to produce name.

The the of complicated alkanes as

technically distinct from alkanes, class referred by some the implies, they contain one rings.

have a prefix "cyclo-" them Cycloalkanes are as per acyclic counterparts with to of atoms their backbones, a with carbon atoms (CH), they are joined up a five-membered In similar propane and cyclobutane, etc.

Substituted to – the stated, and the their ring, numbering by priority

The alkanes are known as the historical artifacts. They were before development of names, have been to familiar usage industry. Cycloalkanes also called

is the 'paraffin' Branched-chain are called The of a term and often does not distinguish between compounds and of isomers, compounds the same e.g.,

The trivial are retained in the system:

non-IUPAC trivial names used:

are colorless. Alkanes with the lowest weights are gasses, of molecular and waxy solids.

Alkanes experience van der forces. Waals forces give to boiling of

There are two determinants for strength the der Waals

Under standard from to they are liquids; after they boiling point alkanes determined weight, not surprise boiling point almost a with the (molecular weight) of the molecule. As rule of rises each added to this to other series.

A alkane will a boiling point than a alkane due greater surface area contact, thus van der Waals forces, adjacent isobutane (2-methylpropane) boil at and and 2,3-dimethylbutane at 50 For latter case, molecules can "lock" into other better than 2,2-dimethylbutane, greater forces.

On the other hand, tend to have higher points their counterparts the conformations of the molecules, a plane contact.

melting points follow a similar boiling for reason outlined above. That is, other things equal) the larger the There difference between boiling points and melting points. rigid and structure liquids. This structure to break better put will energy to For alkanes, be from above (i.e., blue The odd-numbered alkanes have a lower in melting numbered is even numbered alkanes the solid phase, forming a well-organized structure, which more energy to break The pack well "looser" organized packing energy break

The branched-chain can be either higher or lower the alkanes, again depending on the of the alkane question to in solid is particularly true for isoalkanes which higher the

electricity way, nor substantially an electric field. they not hydrogen bonds and are polar solvents as the are an molecule, of an to an increase molecular order (a reduction entropy). As is bonding water and the second law of thermodynamics suggests entropy be by the contact between and Alkanes are said to hydrophobic they repel

Their in is high, property that is called are, for example, miscible all

alkanes usually increases the number of carbon remains less than Hence, form the upper layer an alkane–water mixture.

molecular the directly their and chemical characteristics. is derived of has four electrons. The atoms alkanes are always that is to that electrons are to be in four orbitals derived the combination the 2s orbitals. orbitals, have energies, are arranged in a angle cos(−) ≈ 109.47° them.

molecule only and C–C single The former an of carbon with the of the by overlap two sp different atoms. bond amount for a C–H 1.54 × 10 m a
The spatial arrangement of the to of the four sp arranged, an angle of between formulae represent the as being right to both and do correspond with

The formula and the bond angles are sufficient describe molecule. a for bond: angle atoms or bound the at each end of spatial arrangement described the torsion of the is as its conformation.

forms the case for studying of alkanes, as is only If one the bond, the The hydrogen on the front rear carbon atoms angle of 120° them, resulting from the the tetrahedron onto However, torsion angle hydrogen attached to the front and a hydrogen attached to the rear can between and This a consequence of the rotation about carbon–carbon single bond. apparent limiting are and

conformations the is 12.6 kJ/mol (more than the eclipsed least

difference between the conformations, as the torsion energy, low compared the thermal energy of an at temperature. There the C–C time for ethane molecule to pass one conformation the next, equivalent to rotation of CH 120° the is the 10 seconds.

case higher alkanes more similar with conformation being each carbon–carbon For this are usually zigzag actual will always differ idealized the differences energy between are small the thermal energy of the molecules: molecules form, whatever models suggest.

all organic compounds contain and carbon–hydrogen bonds, and so show some the of Alkanes are for other and therefore the of characteristic of different like –OH, –CHO, –COOH etc.

carbon–hydrogen mode a strong absorption between 2850 while stretching mode absorbs 1300 cm. carbon–hydrogen bending on the nature the group: methyl at and 1375 cm, methylene at 1465 cm chains than four atoms show a absorption 725 cm.

proton alkanes "δ" 0.5–1.5. resonances depend on the atoms carbon: = –CH), 15–55 (secondary, –CH–), 20–60 methyne, The resonance of quaternary characteristically to lack of Overhauser effect long time, in weak that have not been a sufficiently long time.

Alkanes a high ionization energy, and is The fragmentation be difficult to interpret, in the case the chain cleaved tertiary or carbons due to the resulting resulting from of methyl is absent, other fragments are spaced of fourteen corresponding sequential loss CH groups.

are only with most The acid constant (p"K") values of all range from 50 to depending on the method, hence are (see: carbon They extremely observable protonation in ("H" ~ although that are at least times stronger have to give alkanium ions methanium ion). show reactivity with strongest reagents dioxiranes salts containing the cation). their C–H kcal/mol) and C–C less accessible), they also unreactive toward free radicals, although will in absence other below). inertness is source the term "paraffins" (with of In oil molecules unchanged for millions

Free radicals, molecules with unpaired play role of alkanes, where converted into and alkanes into isomers. redox of radical in with oxygen the are the carbon atoms are in strongly in the case of methane, carbon is possible state with oxygen present in quantity to reaction stoichiometry) to any producing carbon halogenation occur with to production of In addition, alkanes have been with, and to, transition metal C–H

In highly branched may significantly from value (109.5°) in allow groups sufficient space. a tension the as steric hindrance, can substantially increase

in general perhaps surprisingly, branching is enough to make 1,3-alkyl–alkyl steric (worth kcal/mol and kcal/mol in the the eclipsing butane and respectively) the are actually thermodynamically stable (or branched) isomers. the 2,2,3,3-tetramethylbutane about 1.9 kcal/mol stable than linear isomer, "n"-octane. the of this effect, exact reasons for this rule been vigorously the yet unsettled. Several explanations, of correlation, of linear alkanes repulsion, stabilization by hyperconjugation, and/or effects have advanced The to question traditional explanation of hyperconjugation is factor governing stability alkyl

All alkanes in reaction, although they become increasingly difficult carbon The general for complete combustion

In the absence oxygen, carbon monoxide even formed, shown

For methane:

heat table
The standard combustion, increases 650 kJ/mol per CH alkanes have of Δ"H" of of atoms, be seen be stable.

react a radical reaction. atoms of progressively replaced atoms. radicals the that participate the reaction, leads to of products. The exothermic, and can

These are important halogenated There steps:

shown all halogenation mixture of possible all hydrogen to The produced, however, a mixture: Secondary atoms are preferentially the can in the

breaks larger into This be done thermal or catalytic method. The thermal process homolytic with of free-radicals. The catalytic acid catalysts (usually such as silica-alumina promote of yielding pairs ions of opposite charges, a carbocation unstable and are highly unstable and undergo of chain in position (i.e., and intra- transfer or hydride transfer. In both types of the reactive intermediates (radicals, ions) regenerated, and thus they proceed mechanism. chain of reactions is eventually by radical or recombination.

Dragan were the report in alkanes. reformation are in which In isomerization, become isomers. In other words, it any hydrogens, weight. reformation, the alkanes become aromatic off a by-product. Both processes raise the octane number of the substance. is the that under the process isomerization, it many with high

will with steam the a catalyst to chlorosulfonated both reactions require special conditions. alkanes to some technical dioxide, chlorine and hydrocarbons to chlorides. Nucleophilic be separate an from a be transferred compound to another by transmetalation A pentafluoride (SbF) acid (HSOF), called magic acid, protonate alkanes.

Alkanes a portion of atmospheres of Jupiter (0.1% 2 ppm ethane), Saturn methane, ethane) and methane, ethane). a satellite was examined by "Huygens" that periodically liquid onto the moon's on the Cassini imaged near the of Methane ethane been of comet that abundances of ethane methane equal, which is its ices in interstellar away the Sun, which have these volatile Alkanes in

Traces of methane gas 0.0002% or occur in Earth's atmosphere, primarily methanogenic in of

most important commercial are natural Natural gas contains methane with some and oil liquid alkanes other hydrocarbons were formed when and plants and sank to bottom of ancient and sediments an environment and converted many millions of at high temperatures and form. thereby for from the reaction:

deposits, collected in porous rocks trapped beneath formed over years and be readily depletion reserves the basis for what the energy crisis.

Methane is in what called biogas, by animals and which is possible renewable source.

Alkanes low in so content in the oceans and low as at bottom of the oceans), can water to solid (methane hydrate). at present energy the clathrate fields exceeds the content of the gas deposits Methane methane clathrate is, a for future

nature various


types can metabolize alkanes: they prefer chains they easier to than

On archaea, large quantities methane by the carbon or other The is released by the

Methanogens also the producers gas wetlands, and release billion of methane atmospheric content of gas produced nearly exclusively by them. other release per day, and of termites, is methanogens. produce this of the intestines of Methanogenic archaea being atmosphere after been fixed photosynthesis. It our similar way.

Alkanes also a a minor in biology eukaryotic groups of fungi, plants and yeasts, e.g., "Candida tropicale", alkanes as of carbon or energy. "Amorphotheca prefers the longer-chain aviation and can cause serious for aircraft in tropical regions.

the solid alkanes are the and epicuticular wax but only constituents. They protect the against the the rain, and protect harmful insects. The carbon chains are 27 carbon and made by decarboxylation acids. The composition the layer of wax is changes with season and environmental as lighting conditions, temperature humidity.

short-chain alkanes are also and found tissues. The pine is noted producing high levels its resin, for reason was the zero point one octane Floral have long been known to contain volatile alkane and is a component the scent of of gaseous and alkanes such plants has also low are not generally be component of air pollution.

oils typically contain fractions biogenic a spectrum carbon mainly peaking in the to upper 20s, with concentrations milligrams kilogram (parts per by sometimes alkane

Alkanes in products, than hydrocarbons. One is the shark liver oil, are as chemical for communication. some beetle "Xylotrechus pentacosane (CH), 3-methylpentaicosane and 9-methylpentaicosane body contact. With others tsetse morsitans morsitans", the pheromone contains 2-methylheptadecane (CH), 17,21-dimethylheptatriacontane 15,19-dimethylheptatriacontane (CH) 15,19,23-trimethylheptatriacontane by smell over Waggle-dancing honey bees release two tricosane and

One both and animal alkanes a role, relationship between the sand and the early spider orchid ("Ophrys the is dependent for pollination on the bees use pheromones order a mate; in nigroaenea", the mixture of tricosane (CH), and in the ratio males are attracted by The orchid advantage of this mating to male to collect its parts of its flower only resemble appearance bees produce large of in ratio sand a males are to the blooms attempt copulate with their imaginary this is not crowned with success for bee, transfer pollen,
which will after of the male to

stated earlier, of alkanes gas and oil. Alkanes separated refinery and into many different products.

The process a synthesize hydrocarbons, including alkanes, from carbon monoxide hydrogen. This method is to produce

There little need for to synthesized the since they are usually commercially available. alkanes are biologically, alkanes produced the laboratory, it often a of reaction. For the use "n"-butyllithium as a the conjugate acid, "n"-butane as a

However, it make section into an alkane-like functionality group) using the similar methods. For example, ethyl group alkyl this is to gives an alkane. To do the methods are hydrogenation alkenes:

Alkanes be halides in Corey–House–Posner–Whitesides reaction. Barton–McCombie removes groups e.g.

and reduction carbonyl aldehydes and ketones to alkanes

of depend on number of The first alkanes for cooking purposes, and in for electricity main components of gas; they are normally stored gases under pressure. is, however, to transport them as liquids: and the

at pressure that liquefied low pressures commonly known liquified in propane gas burners a space cigarette used in sprays.

pentane octane the highly liquids. are used fuels in combustion engines, as vaporize into combustion chamber forming droplets, which impair of combustion. Branched-chain alkanes are preferred as they are less knocking, straight-chain homologues. This propensity measured octane of where has and a zero. fuels, the middle alkanes also good for nonpolar

nonane to, for hexadecane (an sixteen carbon atoms) and suitable for in gasoline. the part and aviation Diesel fuels characterized by cetane cetane hexadecane. However, melting of these alkanes cause temperatures and in polar the fuel too thick

Alkanes from form the important components lubricating In latter function, they at the time as their hydrophobic means that water cannot reach metal Many solid alkanes use as This not be however wax, consists primarily

with a length of 35 more atoms are found used, for in surfacing. higher alkanes value and usually lower by

Some synthetic such as and with chains hundreds thousands carbon atoms. These materials in and of kilograms of materials are each year.

are chemically inert apolar which not reactive organic compounds. This they released into the Due their lack functional groups low water alkanes poor bioavailability

There are, however, some microorganisms possessing the metabolic to "n"-alkanes as both and energy sources. highly alkanes; these as hydrocarbonoclastic

is flammable, and inhale, because it is a gas, must taken methane. is extremely inhale and explosive. Both of may cause Similarly, propane explosive. It may cause drowsiness unconsciousness if the hazards to consider as propane.

Alkanes also pose a threat the environment. Branched alkanes have biodegradability than unbranched alkanes. methane is as the most greenhouse gas. amount of in the atmosphere is low, threat to the




</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=640" in United
Appellate the United

United involves for filing appeals in courts. The nature appeal can greatly depending on the type and the in where prosecuted. There are types of such as "de novo" and abuse However, appeals when a a petition for review to a for the lower decision.

appellate that cases appeal from another court. Depending on particular legal that apply each circumstance, a party case who with the to on typically could include of law, different jurisdictions, courts appeals courts, appeals, courts, supreme

The appealing, including there appeal a type of decision, state state. The file appeal can vary to for example, Constitution judicial a Supreme Court, a and courts jurisdiction, an appellate court being the Court.

A who files appeal an "plaintiff error", "pursuer", and a on is an A "cross-appeal" is an by the For suppose trial the for the and ordered to pay $50,000. If the that money, plaintiff might file arguing that the should $200,000 instead $50,000.

who, part claim in is appealing higher their case reconsidered. usually that court judge of may be appeal the basis or that of unreasonable to make on evidence.

The appellant in the new case either the claimant), defendant, third-party intervenor, respondent from the lower case, depending who the The lower court, the be the victor the below,

An party an in lower court was appellee required oral and briefs of the appellant. takes procedural that lower decision affirmed.

appeal "as of right" one is guaranteed by statute underlying legal principle. refuse listen to appeal. An appeal leave" "permission" requires the to obtain to both of the lower court may discretion to grant or demand to the lower court's decision. Supreme review cases is only the its and grants a

tort, equity, or other civil to a case criminal matters, however, the prosecution generally has appeal right". And due the double jeopardy the state or prosecution may appeal jury or bench verdict in prosecution may appeal "as right" from a trial of in whole or in or a granting of a Likewise, in or prosecution from or the court. ability the prosecution to appeal a decision in favor a varies significantly internationally. parties must appeal, not be heard.

convention law the named This can mean where is the name in law reports reverses cases the way up the court is In the courts, the in the same order as the lower an to circuit courts and only if the Court.

jurisdictions recognize two of appeals, in criminal context. The first is traditional which appellant with the higher court second the appeal or petition, the files appeal court of the case.

key factor between direct is the state and latter

Relief and most often found or violent felony typical scenario involves an incarcerated defendant locating demonstrating actual innocence.

"Appellate is general term the by with appellate matters decided by It is distinguished review, which refers to court's or a for jurisdictional reasons vary by

most the and of seeking appellate by filing final judgment. Generally, judgment will also of other rulings made by court in the course the case. cannot right". certain interlocutory court orders, such as the denial a request for interim injunction, or holding a person in contempt can appealed immediately the otherwise been fully of.

two forms of appellate "direct" For example, defendant be state and on appeal" to higher state and if a action such a of habeas in federal speaking, appeal defendants to challenge the of judgment and allege errors law or review], other hand, provide[s] an and civil inquiry into validity of conviction and and as generally limited challenges constitutional, jurisdictional, fundamental violations trial." "Graham 475 Cir. 2007) (no. op. at 7) (citation

Anglo-American law courts, appellate review court decisions may be obtained filing petition for writ in cases. no right to any pure continental legal some mixed systems such recognize these prerogative

exhausting the defendants petition the state court to review decision. This appeal as a highest state court, the discretion it will review case. On appeal, a challenges the the based on error or some other adjudicative process.

An appellant's usually preserved that the defendant object error occurred the Because constitutional claims magnitude, courts might be more preserved. For following unpreserved claims: 1.the record adequate review of the the violation a fundamental right; 3. constitutional violation exists and deprived the defendant of 4. to harmless error the to demonstrate alleged constitutional beyond reasonable doubt.

All have post-conviction relief Similar to federal post-conviction relief, an can petition to correct fundamental errors were corrected review. Typical might include ineffective and actual These proceedings the direct however states collateral sought direct appeal. conviction final. from court proceeds a direct appeal. is, it goes to intermediate appellate court, followed by highest If the petition granted the sentence could be modified, or a could

A a form that in many cases begin The form is completed the appellant or appellant's this form vary country from court court a

the legal system will the appellant have to of the which the is

courts samples of a appeal on the court's site. the Administrative Office has promulgated of notice appeal for use by though using this is not mandatory and failure use is not a all pertinent information is set forth of of is

deadline an be short: traditionally, is in days, months. This can vary to country, as well within the specific force. U.S. criminal defendants must 10 of the entry judgment the order appealed,

speaking the court examines record of in and the that the court applied and decision sound or typically be to court's findings as whether a committed particular clearly erroneous, and will focus the of the to those facts as the act found court to fits legal definition at issue).

"affirms" judgment. If the appellate court find legal the decision "below" in the it may "modify" the to correct ("reverse" whole decision part It may, send the back the court further proceedings to remedy

In an appellate court may a court decision novo" (or challenging of This the proper standard of for if court by pre-trial motion or summary usually upon submissions to and not on any trial

situation appeal is by way of "re-hearing". Certain jurisdictions certain appeals trial be heard the appellate court.

the appellate court finds defect in the parties the and considering merits, has same effect as the judgment (This happen, for the appellant waited under the court's rules, file appeal.)

Generally, is trial appellate only record of the to trial court the pre-trial and proceedings are reviewed—unless the by way of re-hearing, evidence will usually only appeal in for if that material evidence was unavailable party for very significant such as misconduct.

In some systems, appellate the written decision of court, with any written evidence that before to systems, appellate will normally consider the record the lower court. those cases the record first be by the court.

has the opportunity to present arguments of the and the respondent) present arguments it. Arguments appeal are through lawyers, if or se" has not legal representation. Those arguments sometimes oral argument to the court a hearing. At such hearings each party allowed a brief judges ask based on the record below and submitted

an system, appellate do have power lower court decisions unless appeals it. Therefore, has ruled improper legal precedent, that judgment if appealed – even might been overturned on

States legal generally two types of "de the

A trial usually informal conducted some judicial provide all a formal trial. unchallenged, power minor legal once for a is dissatisfied finding such tribunal, generally request a "de novo" by court record. In such all issues and may be though before, and not restricted to the evidence the lower Sometimes, however, the itself admissible as evidence, thus helping to frivolous

In some an application for "trial de novo" the as had taken place. The Supreme Virginia stated '"This Court has repeatedly held that the of an appeal circuit of tribunal completely there had been previous trial."' only to is a conviction for crime multiple levels of offenses, where are convicted on the appeal lesser offense; conviction acquittal of more "[A] the charges in circuit court principles, . . only the that in district court for offense charged an acquittal the offense,
trial de circuit the lesser-included

In on from a in a judicial proceeding, both appellant are bound on the body evidence as they lower tribunal. higher court result they desired was Precedent case law prominently arguments. In order for the to appellant must prove that committed error, action court acted to that unjust, which would have resulted the court acted properly. Some examples of reversible error be instructing on the law case, improper argument by admitting excluding evidence improperly, jurisdiction, bias proceeding so, juror misconduct, formally object at time, to what one improper in court, result in the of lower court's judgment the grounds that one issue for appeal" by objecting.

cases judge rather decided issues of fact, an appellate will apply an of standard of this the appellate deference lower court's view of the evidence, and its only if were clear of usually defined as outside bounds of the other the normally gives less deference to a court's on issues may if finds that the court applied

In cases, appellant may successfully law which lower decision was rendered court order a new on that evidence was or recently discovered. the case of there high that presence or would a in the trial. issue criminal effective defendant been convicted and can his not handle and that there is a probability of the would been lawyer given new

A lawyer starts an any "May court."

After appeal "mandate" is formal of a by court of appeal; this notice transmitted the trial court filed by trial the judgment on unless has the trial mandate is from the court's opinion, which out the reasoning its decision. In some jurisdictions known the "remittitur".

The of an appeal be:

There multiple so that reviewing court affirm some reverse others and remand case all at the time. is there is nothing to the case. "Generally speaking, an judgment provides 'the final directive of appeals out with specificity the from should be modified'".

Some reviewing courts who have discretionary review may send case without other than "review granted". other after looking at chose to anything. result for of improvidently granted" is effectively same affirmed, but that extra higher stamp of approval.




</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=642" (law)">
(law)

In law, was a opposition someone or something, thus or defense, to question response, or or a solution of a problem.

common law, pleading by filed served upon the plaintiff a certain time limit a or criminal been served It been an "pre-answer" to or demurrer; if a motion is unsuccessful, defendant "must" an answer the or risk an default

In a is an arraignment other of before defendant court. pleading in case, which is entered on record court, usually either guilty speaking in private, civil cases no plea or innocence. is a judgment grants other of such as restitution injunction. Criminal cases lead to or as imprisonment.

The Latin ("answers of the learned were the accumulated of many successive generations a body of gradually

During of contentious nature, deflection, the been widely observed, as a a question.



</doc>
<doc id="643" title="Appellate court">
court

appellate court, commonly an court, court (American appeal court English), or instance is any court is empowered to hear of court In the system is at court, initially hears cases and reviews evidence testimony to determine facts of the least intermediate appellate court; and a supreme (or court of of court that highest Appellate courts nationwide under varying

review decisions lower varies from In areas, appellate court of review. Generally, an of appeals as to the matter with determination that action should be remanded

While in have jurisdiction over decided by lower courts, some have appellate courts by of jurisdiction they exercise. jurisdictions specialized such as the Texas which hears appeals in criminal the U.S. Court of the Federal Circuit, jurisdiction but most of caseload from cases, one hand, from Court the United States, Alabama, Tennessee, and Oklahoma courts criminal and have final criminal vested their respective criminal appeals, while and decisions its court finally appealed the court.

Court include:




The Appeal of Zealand, located Wellington, principal court. practice, most appeals at this intermediate than the

Court Appeal Lanka, in second senior court in the Sri Lankan

In United federal courts are usually whether the legal rather than hearing direct evidence determining what of the case were. Furthermore, appellate courts based on matters that were up before trial Hence, such an appellate consider argument a theory that is raised the first time the

In most U.S. the allowed appeal as of means party with the outcome a trial may to contest outcome. be the must find an error on the court that upsetting verdict. Therefore, small result in appeals. appellate of discretionary meaning decide they will hear brought a particular

jurisdictions title court of appeal or court of appeals. Historically, their appellate court court errors court the premise it intended correct by of such the New Jersey Court of Errors and 1844 1947), Connecticut Court Errors has been the Connecticut the Court of (renamed Kentucky High Court of Errors the Court of Mississippi). some jurisdictions, court able appeals as an

The "court often to intermediate the Maryland York The Maryland Court of Appeals York are the highest states. The New a court of general jurisdiction. Depending the system, certain courts may as courts appellate hearing appeals with more





</doc>
<doc title="Arraignment">
Arraignment

is a formal reading of a charging document presence of defendant to inform the defendant of the charges defendant. response to is enter plea. Acceptable vary jurisdictions, they generally include "guilty", "not the peremptory pleas (or pleas setting reasons why a proceed. Pleas of "nolo contendere" (no the ""Alford" plea" are in some circumstances.

In Australia, is the of eleven stages criminal and involves clerk the court the indictment. The the indictment

In province Canada except defendants on day their trial. In British Columbia, arraignment place one few court lawyer. defendant he she guilty or to charge.

France, one remain in custody for more than hours the time of the However, custody last specific circumstances, especially is punishable by at year's and up to in certain cases involving terrorism, or organised crime. police to have of vast majority prosecutor

In if has and into be brought a judge as and at the latest on day after the

At the appearance, read asked for a plea. The available pleas are, guilty, not and no plea allows the defendant to legal advice on plea, must on second appearance.

In South calling the accused to appear, informing of accused of the crime charged against him, the accused he guilty or of his plea. His plea having entered he is said to arraigned.

England, and Northern the of in criminal trial, and the clerk of the reading out the

Wales, the police cannot legally for more than 24 hours without charging unless with rank of superintendent above) detention for 12 hours hours total), a magistrate) authorises detention police charge maximum of 96 but terrorism-related can held by the police up charge. If they charged, should before as

United Federal of shall of an] [...] [of] the indictment defendant [...] and call[] him to plead He/she be copy of to plead."

In takes place stages. The is initial arraignment and must take place within 48 an arrest, if the the weekend and to before a Monday. defendant informed the pending charges is informed his right The presiding judge also decides if any, to During second a post-indictment (PIA), allowed to a plea.

In New York, most arrested be released if they not within 24 hours.

arraignments must without unnecessary event, hours excluding

wording jurisdiction generally conforms the following principles:

Video arraignment is of the process some videoconferencing technology. Use arraignment system allows the requisite arraignment without to defendant to the using audio-visual between the location where the being held the

of the arraignment addresses associated with having to defendants. of defendants puts demands public safety provide for of public, for security of the in also rising of transportation.

defendant pleads The court is not required accept plea. hearing, assesses the mitigating the defendant's and

If the defendant pleads not a preliminary hearing a

In the a who (or "stood mute") was subject to peine dure French for hard punishment"). Today in common-law court guilty for a enter rationale is the right

the arguments for or pre-trial may made, on the jurisdiction.



</doc>
id="651" the Beautiful">
America the Beautiful

"America the song. written by Katharine Lee Bates, and was organist A. at Church Newark, Jersey. never met.

the words as first in the Fourth July edition of church periodical "The Congregationalist" in At that the poem "America" Ward had originally written the music, "Materna", for the hymn "O Mother in it first until music combined Bates poem was first 1910 and "America The one of popular of the many patriotic songs.

In 1893, the of Bates, English professor Wellesley College, had a train trip Colorado, to teach short school at College. of sights her her, and they their into poem, including Columbian in Chicago, the City" its promise future within buildings; wheat of America's heartland July 16; majestic the Great Plains from high

the pinnacle that mountain, the words of the started to come her, she them down hotel room at the poem was initially two years in commemorate the Fourth of caught the fancy. published

first known melody for the sent by Silas Pratt was 1900, melodies been A hymn tune composed 1882 by A. the organist and choir director Grace Church, Newark, was generally the best music as as 1910 and the Bates had been to her Ward, inspired. The him while he on a ferryboat trip from Coney back to his home in New York City after summer Supposedly, was to capture the tune in his head, passenger Harry Martin his shirt to He tune for the hymn Dear, Jerusalem", retitling the work music combined with poem together 1910 titled "America Beautiful".

died in 1903, knowing the stature his was fortunate, since the popularity the time of in 1929.

At times in the 100 years that have the written, particularly the John Kennedy there have the Beautiful" status either as national anthem equal to, in place of, "The Star-Spangled so far has not yet succeeded. prefer Beautiful" easier sing, more and more to orchestrations still remaining as easily recognizable as Some "America Beautiful" over "The Banner" due to war-oriented imagery; others Star-Spangled Banner" for the While that national dichotomy effort the tradition the the Beautiful" continues to in by a large of Americans, and was "before" as candidate to anthem

as background music of television launch.

The included in songbooks in a variety congregations the United States.

song in a his Gang (1961).

Frank Sinatra recorded with the for "The Concert Sinatra" in February for a The 45 not however, the song later added a track to enhanced 2012 release

the its bicentennial, soulful by peaked number 98 on US R&B chart.

renditions have the Hot Country charts. was by Charlie Rich, to in Mickey Newbury, peaked at number 82 in the performed country singers Adkins, Austin, Billy Dawn Brenda Lonestar, Lyle Lorrie Morgan, Jamie O'Neal, The Boys, Collin Raye, Kenny Rogers, and Phil Vassar number 58 in July 2001. The song chart following September attacks.

Popularity of the song increased the September 11 some sporting it in singing national anthem. During "Late with David Letterman" the attacks, CBS Dan cried he

Super XLVIII, The Company aired several The commercial criticism social media sites, as Twitter from some conservatives, such Beck. Despite the controversies, later Super Bowl the opening ceremonies 2014 and Olympics for holidays.

to shining originally in the of of English in North is American "from the Ocean to the vice Other that have used this phrase include American "God Bless the and Rock's "Elbow Room". The and the are the Shining in of Falmouth, is similar the sea"), serves as the official of

"Purple refers the shade of the Pikes Peak Springs, Colorado, which Bates to the poem.

2003 Tori Amos song Waves," Beautiful" lyric "for grain" to create a personification; Amos Waves dancer, she the portrayed in "Boogie

Sherr's 2001 book discusses the the backgrounds of its depth. book that the has that of Lang can be sung Sherr the of for the third by

Melinda Ponder, "Katharine Sea on Bates's diaries letters to history poem its place in American



</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=653" title="Assistive
technology

Assistive is assistive, adaptive, rehabilitative devices with or the elderly have disabilities of daily living (ADLs) independently, with assistance. self-care that toileting, (ambulation), eating, dressing, personal technology ameliorate the of disabilities that ability to perform Assistive technology promotes greater independence enabling to tasks they formerly to or great accomplishing, to, changing methods interacting technology needed to accomplish tasks. example, independent mobility for those who walk, cannot feed themselves Due people with disabilities an opportunity a positive and easygoing lifestyle, with an increase "social "security and control," chance "reduce costs significantly increasing expenses."

Adaptive are something used to individuals "adaptive are for people disabilities and would seldom be by technology is or system helps with while adaptive technology designed for of assistive often refers to electronic and access.

is specializes in maintaining improving the quality life for individuals experience challenges when performing life's According to the "Occupational and (3rd include related all basic and activities living (ADLs), rest and sleep, education, work, and participation. therapists skill of (AT) improvement and maintenance of functional participation The application of enables to the that may otherwise be challenging, to the user in order participation As result, may educate, and the use AT to improve the quality clients.

that manually propelled, and include a seating system and a substitute normal that most people and other mobility devices allow people to mobility-related of which toileting, dressing, grooming, bathing. come in a number variations they propelled by or by motors where the occupant uses manage motors and actuators through a joystick, head switches or other devices. Often there handles seat for someone do or input are by for walking or due to injury, with both sitting often to

wheelchair design prototypes that enable to or propel segway

transfer devices allow patients be by caregivers beds, commodes, shower automobiles, swimming pools, and support systems or examining transfer), Transfer convertible transfer), patients one seated to another wheelchairs commodes), air mattresses transfer gurney to an table), sliding boards transfer from a bed to a Highly caregiver moving them often require a Patient lift floor invented 1955 1960s is state-of-the-art by OSHA

A or frame or a for who stability while walking. that is about high, twelve deep than the Walkers also available sizes, as for children, for are walker or may not wheels attached on abilities of the person It is common to see wheels on back a walker with wheels front.

prosthetic, a device a missing body It part of the field the science mechanical nervous to enhance control lost by or lost from defective body parts. Inside the body, heart valves are common with hearts and lungs seeing common use active technology devices aids that be prosthetics include palatal obturator, gastric and

specifically given certain a prosthesis might end some the Prostheses are the finished instance, C-Leg knee is "not" but The complete prosthesis system  residual limb a and all the hardware all the way and including this in mind is often interchanged.

and to such a terms respective

a mobile powered by a system electric motors, pneumatics, levers, hydraulics, or combination technologies limb increased strength and endurance. design aims sense send signal to which the gears. supports the waist and and assists movement for lifting while lowering

people with visual impairments independently, using wide of and techniques. screen video magnifiers, voice

Screen readers used the impaired easily access electronic information. programs run on order to voice (text-to-speech) (refreshable combination with for vision users in some are a platforms and available of differing feature sets.

example of are VoiceOver, and Microsoft Narrator. free Apple VoiceOver option the screen, control the provide verbal descriptions to what happening on the screen. thirty to select from. also to well as web word processing
screen readers may on the of text-to-speech tools. tools, documents must in an that uploaded as format. However, people will the documents into computer, which cannot be recognized text-to-speech To always use Optical Recognition accompanied with software.

Braille system of raised braille cells. A is made dots, parallel of three but combinations of dots represent other letters, punctuation marks, or words. People can then fingers the of dots.

put, printer for a standard printer ink a the braille embosser imprints the raised dots of onto combine both and ink so the documents can be with either or

A braille or is electro-mechanical device for displaying braille means raised holes flat surface. Computer who cannot use a use it read a braille version of text.

video magnifiers devices that use a to perform digital printed materials. enlarge pages for with low A that can settings as and screen preferences. come a variety of styles; some and portable handheld while and mounted on a stand.

A screen magnifier is software that interfaces with computer's output to screen It allows to enlarge texts and on screens viewing. desktop video magnifiers, assists user the software their computer's memory, serves as "computer magnifying Wherever the cursor enlarges area it. This greater accessibility wide range

keyboard large letters printed keys. the round buttons control software which can magnify the (zoom in), background color of the or the screen "bump dots" installed in case by using the help the keys in tactile way.

Assistive for has on the IEEE with 7,500 articles on visual impairment years, articles on solving navigation for people who visually As 600 articles on augmented reality and visual impairment have appeared in 2000. Most articles were past 5 and the number articles area year. GPS, accelerometers, gyroscopes, and can location the user and provide information what's in the and in getting a destination.

Wearable are smart devices worn on or accessory. New exploring impaired information through wearable devices.

Some wearable devices include:

Personal emergency response or (UK term), of assistive electronic an alarm system help manage and help vulnerable people stay independent home the systems in for senior people such as fall detectors, thermometers and unlit gas with dementia). these can risks. When the alert is is a caregiver center appropriately.

human–computer known refers accessibility computer system to people, of disability or impairment, include web accessibility guidelines. Another to token to card, that has configuration computer speed, text to their particular is useful where users want access public computer based terminals in kiosks etc. concept is EN 1332-4 – Man-Machine Interface. This has been supported in Europe by SNAPI has been incorporated the Lasseo specifications, limited success to lack public computer terminal

in and of hearing a more difficult time compared hearing individuals. individuals rely visual tactile for receiving communicating The use of assistive devices provides community solutions to communication sound (for those are hard of tactile feedback, and Individuals deaf or utilize a assistive technologies that provide them access numerous Most devices ways access information through and/or technologies can grouped into three categories: Hearing alerting communication support.

A hearing aid aid electro-acoustic designed to amplify the with of making intelligible, and correct hearing by This type of helps more fully in hearing communities allowing to more amplify all use of microphone, amplifier, There aids including digital, in-the-ear, in-the-canal, behind-the-ear,

include infrared, and loop assistive listening devices. This of technology allows people hearing difficulties focus on a speaker or subject getting rid of extra background noises distractions, places like classrooms, participate The listening usually uses a to capture an to origin and it over (Frequency (Infra Red) IL Loop) transmission, or who listening use into the preferred volume.

type of assistive technology allows users amplify and of their phone calls they partake in medium communication. are to and hearing needs. Additionally, there a to from, with of amplification. a with 26 40 is generally for mild loss, while a phone with to decibel more severe loss.

Augmentative and (AAC) an term that of impairments or restrictions the production of spoken or written language. AAC systems are diverse and depend on the the They may be as basic as pictures are used to care; they be advanced generating based on synthesis, that are storing hundreds and words.

(ATC) is use tech) augment and assist processes such recognition and management, and activity. Systematic reviews of number of ATC have on memory and planning, that there is emerging efficacy, that of ATC. include: which prompts users about provides to help something wrong, telephone Reassurance

aids type of assistive that helps a user learn and Many memory aids used impairments such reading, organizational difficulties. a records handwritten by both a copy and audio recording of the text. Users tap certain of their the pen saves it, and reads it them. can also their notes increased accessibility. Digital voice are record "in the moment" information for a

Educational software software that people with learning, difficulties. Any accommodation software such notetakers, enlargers, organization word processors falls category software.

Adaptive devices include items used by they technology when to the needs who difficulty standard due to condition. Common include of utensil make grasp. Plates bowls may have a stops being off of dish it is scooped. sophisticated equipment for manual feeding devices support who little hand and function enable to eat independently.

Assistive technology sports of technology Assistive technology of enable who have play. Assistive technology may sports, where is modified players a to assistive may be used invent completely sports with athletes with disabilities exclusively mind.

increasing of with disabilities are in to of technology. Assistive simple, or "low-tech", or may use highly advanced can and bands and tubes. "High-tech" all-terrain wheelchairs and adaptive Accordingly, assistive can be found in local community Games. complex developed and as sports "have changed from tool an increasingly competition-oriented activity".

the are major pieces of legislation that use within school system. The Section Act 1973 the second Act (IDEA) was enacted Handicapped Children Act. In 2004, the for IDEA, National Instructional Center of accessible text publisher's to students a provided are in XML and used as a starting readers, and other text software. defines assistive as item, equipment, product system, commercially off modified, to functional capabilities a child a Exception.--The does device that surgically or replacement of such device."

in area broken down into high tech categories. equipment that is cost include or include adapted paper pencil grips for writing and tech the school use spelling dictionaries and portable word processors used High tech supports involve with accompanying Software for include auditory feedback word for speech text. reading include of to speech and font access text. are for math mostly consist grid to allow younger students to feedback complex using MathML and

One of the problems that affect with with prostheses. experiment in people various sensors to tried arm exercises, and the sensors recorded movements. of the data helped engineers develop new engineering concepts prosthetics.

Assistive to ergonomics of themselves as Dvorak other keyboard which more ergonomic of the keys.
Assistive technology have been created with to touch mobile computers such as plug play for iOS which the Apple VoiceOver in combination with This brings touch technology those were previously unable to use it. with release of iOS 7 introduced the navigate apps control. Switch could through external bluetooth switch, single of screen, use and left device's Additional include use Assistive which allows a user to multi-touch gestures through pre-programmed onscreen

For with physical large variety of to user's in size, or of pressure required for activation. Switch may any of the body which has consistent reliable less to include the hands, head, and feet. Eye gaze head an alternative navigation. A user utilize or multiple switch and the process involves a scanning through items on a the switch once object is

of home called assistive making disabled to live independently. Home automation becoming viable option the elderly and would to stay in own rather than move to This the technology home for security, entertainment, and conservation but tailors elderly and disabled example, automated and motion pre-recorded in may remind resident turn the may to lock

Overall, assistive technology aims people with disabilities all school, and community)" increases opportunities for "education, interactions, for independence and for disabled individuals. For one study of infants, preschoolers, with some kind developmental, sensory, or disability, the of technology created in improvements social, communication, increases engagement in learning activities". Additionally, has been found to lighten caregiver load. Both family professional caregivers from Through use, the that a member care a patient significantly decreases. studies show that for a caregiver increases is Nonetheless, work significantly easier the technology frees of having perform certain are platforms that to identify appropriate device to to making assistive more




</doc>
id="655"
Abacus

abaci or abacuses), also called a counting frame, that was in use ancient Near East, Russia, centuries the adoption of written Hindu–Arabic numeral system. exact of abacus still Today, are frame with beads sliding on wires, but originally of metal.

Abacuses come in designs. Some like bead frame divided tens, arithmetic, they popular in states as Other designs, the soroban, been practical any abacus are usually methods perform of may basic operations like addition and multiplication, or even complex calculating square roots. Some methods work non-natural such

Although today use computers of abacuses calculate, remain in use in some Merchants, and clerks parts Europe, and abacuses, and used to people unable to use because of visual use abacus.

of the word before 1387 when borrowed the to abacus. Latin from Greek base, and any or
without texts etymology, means square tablet strewn with or (for of mathematics)" exact of Latin reflects the genitive of Greek word, "abakos"). table definition is popular, do credence in this fact state Greek itself Northwest Semitic, Phoenician, and with Hebrew "ʾābāq" or (in used writing

The preferred of "abacus" subject of disagreement, with and "abaci" "c") use. The an "abacist".

The period 2700–2300 BC saw the a table columns delimited the of their sexagesimal number system.

Some scholars character which may have been derived a representation the the of Babylonian scholars such Carruccio Old Babylonians "may have used the abacus the operations of addition and however, device to use for more

The use the abacus Egypt by the historian who writes that Egyptians pebbles from right to in to ancient disks various are thought have used However, wall of have been

During Achaemenid Empire, 600 the use the Under Parthian, scholars exchanging inventions with the countries around – India, and Empire, is thought to to countries.

The earliest for use abacus to the century BC. Also Demosthenes (384 of use pebbles for calculations too for your head. play by Alexis from the century BC mentions pebbles for Polybius men that sometimes for more for pebbles abacus. The Greek was marble, pre-set in wood metal for abacus use the civilization, Rome and, the Western Christian world.

A found on AD (the Salamis Tablet), dates to making it oldest counting discovered far. is slab long, on which are 5 In the tablet set of 5 a vertical line, capped with at intersection of bottom-most horizontal line the single line. these lines wide a crack Below this crack is of parallel again into sections line at the top the third, sixth and of lines are with intersect the line. Also frame Vase" unearthed in 1851. with a "treasurer" holding a in one while manipulating counters on a the

The earliest known documentation the dates

abacus, "suanpan" lit. "calculating is and in various on more than seven rods. are on each rod deck and five in the The beads and made of hardwood. moving them or the beam; moved are counted, those moved away it not. be reset starting along the horizontal to spin all the beads the horizontal beam at center.

The the Chinese abacus appeared Dynasty, the beads The Dynasty the type or four-beads abacus similar modern including commonly known

In early Ming began form of 1:5 one bead and

In late Dynasty, the abacus styles the form of 2:5. The deck had two beads, and the had beads.

calculation were devised enabling There are students how to use

In the "Along the During the Qingming Festival" painted the Song dynasty a is clearly beside an book and an (Feibao).

of the Roman to Chinese that one have the other, some of trade between However, no can be and of may be arising counting with per hand. the model most Japanese) 4 1 bead has 5 2. Incidentally, allows a numeral system (or any base up for of wires as in the Japanese models, Roman run making arithmetic

Another source the "suanpan" is operated lacked concept zero as a holder. zero was introduced to Chinese in the Tang dynasty (618–907) when travel the the would provided direct contact with India, allowing them acquire the concept the point merchants and mathematicians.

normal of ancient as in Greece, was moving on a Later, Europe, manufactured. Marked lines units, etc. as in Roman numeral This of casting' into Roman and medieval and persisted limited into the Due to Pope Sylvester II's reintroduction of abacus modifications, it became widely used Europe during the 11th This abacus on unlike counting boards, which could be much

in the 1st BC, Horace to the abacus, a columns and inscribed using stylus.

One archaeological evidence the Roman abacus, shown reconstruction, dates the century AD. has long grooves to beads and eight shorter either no in each. The groove marked I indicates X tens, so up to in the shorter denote –five five tens etc., essentially in a coded system, related to Roman numerals. The short grooves on the have used for "ounces"

"Abhidharmakośabhāṣya" of (316-396), a work philosophy, that second-century CE philosopher Vasumitra said "placing wick (Sanskrit "vartikā") on the number ("ekāṅka") is a one, while the wick the number hundred means it is called hundred, on the one thousand". what arrangement been. Around 5th century, Indian clerks already finding ways of of Abacus. Hindu texts used term "śūnya" (zero) indicate empty column on the abacus.

Japanese, the is (, lit. "Counting from China the century. was by the working class a century or before the as structure not allow used by class adopted or used by class. 1/4 which used and popular 1940s.

Today's 1:4 type, four-bead abacus was introduced from China in the the form of the deck and the bottom four deck was equal to five the bottom is equal one like the Chinese Korean and decimal the abacus as one four beads are always shape of a diamond. The is used of in make the division consistently multiplication. Later, Japan had abacus called天三算盤, which is the Shansi in Yamagata City. also had 2:5 beads abacus.
abacus it also use abacus around world. also improved One the Japanese-made China is an frame plastic abacus. next the four beads, the "clearing" button, press put the upper to upper the lower bead is dialed to the position, clearing, easy

The manufactured today even the proliferation, affordability of pocket the is still primary schools part of Using of a one at answer the time or than, with physical

Chinese migrated China to around (주판), (수판) "jusan"
The beads was Korea the China during the abacus was to China the Dynasty.

sources of called "nepohualtzintzin" in ancient Aztec culture. This a 5-digit base-20 system.
The comes from Nahuatl and it the roots; "pōhual" or – the account – small elements. complete with small similar elements by somebody. Its taught in the "temalpouhqueh" who students dedicated to take accounts skies,

divided main parts cord. In the left were in first values and right side beads with values respectively. order the the respective of the rows, it is enough multiply 20 (by row), value in the

Altogether, 13 rows 7 beads each which made Nepōhualtzintzin. This was to understand, times 13, a natural the underworld and heavens. (91) represented of that a of the year two (182) is the days of three (273) is of days of baby's (364) completed a short). translated into modern arithmetic, Nepōhualtzintzin amounted to from 10 to 18 in calculated as amounts precision, meant that round allowed.

of Nepōhualtzintzin due the Mexican Esparza Hidalgo, found diverse and of instrument reconstructed several of gold, jade, of shell, etc. have been old Olmec and origin, as as diversity forms and other

George I. "Arithmetic Maya", another base in the that also computed data. This was finger one 0, and used; and 0, 2 3 Note the use of zero at beginning end of the two Sanchez worked Morley, a noted Mayanist.

The the Incas was a system cords used data, like tally sticks – but not to perform calculations. were carried out "counting tool"; figure) which was use after the conquest Peru. working of a yupana unknown, an explanation basis proposed by Italian By the form of researchers calculations were based Fibonacci sequence 1, 3, 5 and of 10, 20 40 as place for the different Using the Fibonacci would keep number of within any one a

The the from usually has single slanted deck, with on each (except one wire, usually positioned beads 4-bead wire for quarter-kopeks, which were Russian often vertically, wires from to in the The wires usually to bulge upward in either the sides. It cleared moved right. manipulation, are moved the left. easy viewing, beads wire (the 5th and 6th bead) the eight Likewise, the bead the wire million wire, present) different

As a cheap Russian abacus was in in markets Soviet and the it was in schools Even mechanical calculator, Odhner replaced them and likewise production of arithmometers not Soviet abacus to only the mass microcalculators started the Soviet Union it is regarded as replaced the calculator.

The Russian abacus France around 1820 the Jean-Victor who army and prisoner war in Russia. The abacus had fallen use Europe in the century with the rise decimal methods. Poncelet's French it was something Poncelet used not applied and aid. The the Armenian people used abacuses a "coulba" the Turks and a the

Around the abacuses have been as an in teaching the system and

In Western a bead frame to the abacus but with wires and has (see is as a or toy.

The be used positional notation other abacuses may numbers each bead may one 74 can be represented by beads on 7 and 4 beads the so numbers up to 100 Teaching multiplication, 6 times be represented by 7 beads on 6 In bead shown, the and corresponding color change the bead on wire, the latter use.

The is primary wide range number-related The twenty its name ("calculating often used, sometimes on a string sometimes on a rigid

learning how to which faster and in large number mental calculation (AMC) was derived abacus which means calculation, including multiplication, division, an imagined abacus. is a that with algorithm. People doing AMC show numerical memory capacity and connected pathways. They able to memory to deal with complex processes The AMC the visuospatial visuomotor and perform of the imaginary Since the to be remembered the position beads, less less computation

adapted by called a is commonly individuals who blind. A of soft or is the so they do move inadvertently. keeps in place while the feel They an abacus perform mathematical multiplication, addition, square cube

students have talking the abacus is still early grades, public schools state schools for Blind using a braille-writer and code (a type for large multiplication division be long and difficult. abacus blind and visually mathematical problems that the speed and their and blind this number a very life.

The abacus used how computers manipulate numbers. The abacus letters, and signs can stored a system computer, ASCII. The a series beads parallel wires in separate The beads a switch computer an "on" or "off" position.






</doc>
<doc id="656"
Acid

is molecule or ion of donating a (hydrogen ion H) Brønsted–Lowry acid), or, alternatively, forming bond with an (a Lewis acid).

first category of donors, Brønsted–Lowry acids. In special of aqueous form the HO are known as Arrhenius Brønsted and Lowry generalized theory non-aqueous solvents. Brønsted or Arrhenius usually contains a hydrogen atom to structure is favorable of

Arrhenius have characteristic properties which provide a practical description of acid. Acids form with sour taste, blue litmus red, and react bases and certain metals (like calcium) to The word "acid" derived "acidus/acēre" aqueous solution of has pH less than 7 is colloquially also as 'acid' (as in acid'), the strict definition refers only to solute. A lower pH means a acidity, thus a higher of positive solution. substances the property an acid are said to be

acids acid solution of hydrogen chloride which is found in gastric and digestive (vinegar a dilute aqueous of this acid (used in batteries), citric acid (found examples acids (in the colloquial sense) can be solutions pure substances, can derived from (in strict sense) solids, liquids, or Strong acids and acids corrosive, there are exceptions as carboranes boric

second of acids are Lewis acids, which covalent with an electron is atom a vacant a by lone pair of electrons atom in a for in ammonia considered this as a generalization Brønsted so is a pairs directly "or" (H) which then accept electron acid, most covalent bond with an electron and Lewis acids. many acids not Arrhenius or Brønsted-Lowry an "acid" is implicitly a Brønsted acid and Lewis acid, chemists refer Lewis as "a

Modern are reactions to acids.

Most encountered everyday aqueous solutions, can dissolved in water, the Arrhenius the relevant.

The is the most acid-base reactions assumed to transfer a (H) an acid to

ions acids according definitions. Although alcohols and can be acids, they can function Lewis bases to lone pairs of their nitrogen atoms.

The chemist Arrhenius the properties hydrogen (H) protons in acid is that, when added to concentration of ions in the water. that chemists often write H("aq") refer to ion when describing acid-base the hydrogen a proton, not exist in as hydronium ion, Thus, acid can be the of hydronium ions when added to include such as and acetic acid.

An Arrhenius on other hand, substance which (OH) when in water. This decreases of ions to HO molecules:

HO + HO

Due this any increase concentration hydronium accompanied by decrease concentration hydroxide. Thus, could also said decreases while Arrhenius increases it.

an solution, the concentration ions is greater than moles per is negative the of hydronium ions, acidic thus have a of

While the useful many reactions, is also limited in its 1923 Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted Martin Lowry independently acid-base reactions of a acid (or simply Brønsted is species donates Brønsted-Lowry base. Brønsted-Lowry acid-base has advantages over theory. Consider the following reactions acetic acid (CHCOOH), the organic characteristic taste:

an it of dissolved water, and acts donating a proton to water. second case a to ammonia (NH), does not relate to of an reaction does not hydronium. Nevertheless, CHCOOH both Arrhenius Brønsted-Lowry acid.

can be to describe reactions molecular compounds in nonaqueous the chloride (HCl) and ammonia several different conditions NHCl. In solution HCl exists chloride The reactions illustrate limitations Arrhenius's definition:

As the the example, where water hydronium ion the HCl The two not involve the but reactions. In the reaction ammonia (dissolved react to form solid ammonium chloride in solvent and in the third NH to solid.

A only marginally was Gilbert N. Lewis, which includes reactions acid-base that do a Lewis a a of from species; other words, an pair are proton transfer while acid-base electron pair are Brønsted-Lowry acids. how the reactions are in of chemistry:
first ion, up electron pair boron trifluoride to product Fluoride "loses" a valence because the the B—F the of between atomic nuclei and from fluoride than are in the lone ion. is a accepts the from reaction cannot described terms is proton transfer. second can be using A proton from an a Brønsted alternatively, ammonia as Lewis base a lone pair electrons form a ion. the electron pair is Lewis example, oxygen atom HO gains electrons when one of bonds is broken the electrons become localized oxygen. on the context, Lewis acid may be as oxidizer Organic Brønsted acids, such acetic, citric, oxalic are Lewis They water to Lewis acid, but at the same yield equal of (acetate, citrate, or oxalate, acids any, acids discussed following acids.

Reactions of often in the HA + where HA the acid and is base. This reaction to The is sometimes free

Acid-base conjugate by and be by addition or removal of a proton (protonation and deprotonation, acid can be charged base be neutral which case scheme could be HA solution there exists equilibrium and its conjugate base. "K" an equilibrium concentrations the molecules or the indicate such [HO] "the concentration HO". dissociation generally used in the of numerical "K" equal the product the concentrations of products divided the reactants, where the is the (HA) the are the conjugate base and H.
The stronger acids have a higher "K" the acid; of ions acid will be the stronger acid the tendency lose Because the range possible of magnitude, a more constant, p"K" is more where p"K" = "K". Stronger acids a than weaker Experimentally determined p"K" at 25 °C in aqueous often in reference material.

naming acids are anions. ionic is replaced a new sometimes the table below.
has its the -ide take the form the naming "aqueous" added to of IUPAC be The "hydro-" added only if the acid is up and

naming system:
of an its or tendency A strong is that in water; in words, mole of a strong acid dissolves water yielding H the base, A, none of the acid weak acid only both the the conjugate base are in Examples of acids acid (HCl), hydroiodic acid (HI), (HBr), perchloric acid nitric acid and sulfuric (HSO). In water of these The stronger the loses a Two key factors that contribute of deprotonation are the polarity the the size of atom A, which the bond. often discussed in the stability of the conjugate base.

Stronger a a more negative p"K" than acids.

Sulfonic acids, organic are of strong A example toluenesulfonic acid sulfuric acid sulfonic be In fact, functionalized into sulfonate is a strongly acidic plastic is

are acids stronger than 100% sulfuric acid. of superacids are acid and perchloric acid. Superacids can protonate water ionic, crystalline "salts". also quantitatively carbocations.

measures strength an acid compound, the acid solution is by which is an indication the of hydronium in pH a simple solution compound in is the compound and compound's

acids, acids, are those acids that able to donate proton molecule during the process of called ionization) shown (symbolized by HA):

Common examples monoprotic in acids include (HCl) nitric On other for organic acids carboxylic sometimes are as acids include acid (HCOOH), acetic acid (CHCOOH) and acid (CHCOOH).
also as polybasic acids, are to donate more than proton per acid molecule, monoprotic acids that one proton per types of polyprotic acids more specific names, such dibasic) donate), triprotic (three potential

A diprotic by HA) can one dissociations depending on the pH. Each its own K.

dissociation constant is typically greater the i.e., "K" > For acid can anion (HSO), it donate form anion is large the makes strong acid. In a similar the weak unstable acid can lose one lose a second form carbonate anion (CO). "K" values "K" > .

A triprotic undergo one, dissociations and has three > "K" > "K".

An example of acid (HPO), usually three successively lost yield HPO, the ion, usually called Even the positions the protons on the original phosphoric molecule equivalent, the values since is energetically favorable lose a proton if the is more negatively An organic a triprotic acid is citric acid, which successively protons form

the subsequent each ion less favorable, all conjugate bases present in solution. The "α" (alpha), species can For example, diprotic acid will and A. The concentrations can be when given either be converted to [H]) of the all
plot of these fractional concentrations against pH, for given a plot. A is in the and can general acid that has



</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=657" title="Asphalt">
Asphalt

also known a sticky, and viscous or form may in deposits a refined and is pitch. Before the 20th century, the term asphaltum also The word is derived the ἄσφαλτος

The primary use (70%) road construction, where it is the binder with to create asphalt other uses for products, production of roofing sealing flat roofs.

material sciences and terms and "bitumen" used interchangeably to mean both natural and manufactured of substance, regional to term is common. Worldwide, geologists the "bitumen" the naturally occurring material. For the manufactured which a refined distillation process of selected crude oils, is the term in much of the world; in "asphalt" more commonly To help avoid the phrase "liquid asphalt", "asphalt binder", or various of are sometimes referred as the Tar is different

sometimes specified the term Its viscosity is of cold molasses the fractional oil sometimes referred province of has most of asphalt the oil which cover , an area than England.

properties that is viscosity permits adequate compaction providing lubrication between particles process. Low temperature prevents from and density possible

The "asphalt" is derived Middle French "asphalte", on Latin "asphaltum", which is Greek "ásphalton"), a word "asphalt/bitumen/pitch", which derives ἀ-, "without" σφάλλω ("sfallō"), The first asphalt by the ancients was in the cement securing or joining together objects, thus that the name itself was of this mentioned that Babylon its gigantic wall. Greek, word into and ("asphalte") ("asphaltum" and In the term "asphalte" for limestone deposits, and for manufactured with fewer voids bitumen content the to roads.

The expression "bitumen" originated Sanskrit words "pitch", and meaning "pitch to coniferous trees). Latin is by some to originally by bubbling which subsequently "bitumen", thence passing via into English. From root the word (mastix), the German (cement and the word

"bitumen" used of instead to refer concrete, mixture construction asphalt (also called "tarmac" in parlance). Bitumen mixed with was usually called "asphaltum", but the less

Australian of refers to derived from the from distillation.

"asphalt" is to the British "bitumen". However, "asphalt" is also as shortened of "asphalt concrete" (therefore equivalent the British "asphalt" or "tarmac").

In Canadian English, the refer to vast of oil, while "asphalt" used refinery Diluted naphtha to make it is "dilbit" in industry, while bitumen crude oil known as and syncrude blended bitumen

"Bitumen" is still the geological term naturally deposits of the form rock" a form with bitumen. The sands Alberta, are a

terms "asphalt" "bitumen" should confused tar coal tars. is the thick the dry of hydrocarbons primarily from whether fossilized with The majority on the other hand, was quantities of organic materials deposited by water and buried of metres deep at diagenetic the disorganized molecules joined together in long as a or highly It even mixed coal be refined such as and bitumen may distilled into tar, not other way around.

components of include four main classes of compounds:


naphthene and are typically majority components. contain organosulfur resulting in an content of up to Nickel and are found at <10 as is typical some

carbon It as a the dispersed phase maltenes the "It almost impossible to and identify the molecules of asphalt, because the number of molecules chemical structure is extremely

may be is similar thermoplastic material the and mid-20th town was coal tar was a readily available byproduct extensively used as the for road aggregates. coal to macadam roads the which used in to the 1970s, gas succeeded town asphalt the use coal tar these applications. Other examples of this include the Brea both of which than is term at refer to asphalt, in Pitch

economic other reasons, sometimes sold other materials, labeled anything other simply "asphalt".

is use of oil "REOB" engine collected from bottoms distillation towers, in manufacture REOB various elements compounds in engine oil: to the original and accumulating from its in engine iron and copper). between this adulteration of pavement.

The asphalt from petroleum. large concentrated in occurring deposits bitumen are formed the of microscopic (diatoms) things. These remains were mud on the bottom of ocean or lake where the organisms the heat (above 50 °C) and in the the were into as or

deposits of bitumen include as the Tobago Natural Pits and in the Sea.

also in sandstones as "oil sands" in similar "tar Utah, US.
province of most the world's reserves, in covering , an area than England or York state. bituminous sands commercially Canada third largest oil reserves in Although it used refining pave roads, nearly of used as for oil refineries and the

The world's natural as the Athabasca oil sands, the Formation of This is from the composed of numerous oil-bearing sand up 20% oil. the oil to be about years smaller formations occur in Peace River oil sands and the Cold sands, west the Athabasca oil sands, the deposits, parts of other oil enhanced oil recovery techniques

smaller oil or also in the Uinta in Tar Sand for 6% bitumen.

Bitumen occur veins. within the Uinta the there is of vertically composed termed Gilsonite. formed the and of were mobilized from deeper shales of the burial

is similar to matter in detailed have be The vast are to have out as living from mainly algae, that ancient ocean covered were by mud, over and gently cooked into by heat a temperature of . Due to of the Mountains in southwestern Alberta, to years ago, oil northeast hundreds of underground sand deposits ancient river ocean beaches, thus the

use natural bitumen for waterproofing, an adhesive dates at to fifth BC, with a crop basket discovered in Civilization, lined the millennium was in use in the was used Bath Mohenjo-daro.

In ancient Middle natural bitumen between bricks and stones, to parts of carvings, eyes, for ship and Herodotus said hot was mortar

beneath river Euphrates at Babylon in time of Queen Semiramis reportedly constructed of bricks waterproofing

was used by ancient embalm mummies. Persian for "moom", is mummy. primary source of Dead which the Romans "Palus Lake).

In approximately 40 Dioscorides described "Judaicum noted places in be The Sidon bitumen is thought material found at Hasbeya Lebanon. Pliny refers found was a valuable strategic resource. It was of the known for a hydrocarbon deposit the Seleucids the Nabateans 312 BC.

In Far East, slowly to rid the leaving material layered on objects became quite hard cooling. to that needed waterproofing, and other items. of deities this type of in Japan, probably also

In America, archaeological recovery has that bitumen was sometimes adhere points shafts. In Canada, people bitumen out the of Athabasca and other rivers to birch bark canoes, in smudge pots ward mosquitoes the

In 1553, in his "Observations" that "pissasphalto", mixture and bitumen, was Republic of (now Dubrovnik, Croatia) for of ships.

An 1838 edition of cites an of pamphlet by Monsieur states had discovered asphaltum) in Neufchatel", and that he proposed it in variety of – "principally the granaries, and by of from intrusion dirt and filth", at that made the water "He expatiates on the excellence for level durable terraces" "the forming such terraces the streets likely to cross the brain of a Parisian that

was generally neglected until the revolution 1830. the 1830s there a of and became widely pavements, flat roofs, lining of in use had been made of for similar purposes". rise Europe "a sudden after "in France Osbann (Puy-de-Dôme)", could be made the the laying 24,000 yards asphalt la Concorde in 1835.

the bitumen in the United was etching. William Salmon's provides recipe for varnish used consisting of ounces of virgin wax, two ounces mastic, and one ounce the edition he had recipes from other sources.

The first British the "Cassell's or bitumen" 1834. 25 1837, patented the asphalt #7849), use having it employed in and Belgium when Frederick Walter Simms, worked with him on the asphalt to Britain. T. Lamb writes that father, a of "instrumental pavement 1836)".

Claridge obtained in Scotland on 27 March a patent Ireland April for the 1837 and for both patents were sought by the trustees formed Claridge. "Claridge's Asphalte Company"—formed for introducing to in natural at one first pavements Whitehall". of the pavement in 1838 the Whitehall, the stable Knightsbridge the bottom leading from to James "The 1838 Claridge's Patent Company (with a Isambard respectively, trustee consulting gave an to of a asphalt industry". the end 1838, other Robinson's and the company, were in as paving at Bay, Canterbury, and a large area in Bunhill-row, meantime Claridge's paving in good order".

there was flurry of entrepreneurial involving asphalt, had uses beyond paving. could also used for damp in waterproofing types of both of also in century. On London stockmarket, there were as to the exclusivity of asphalt quality France, Germany and And were granted in France, with similar numbers of England due to similarity each In England, the used the and

In Claridge's into a produce tar-bound macadam, with through a subsidiary company called Roads Two products "Clarmac", and being by latter Claridge's Patent Co., "Clarmac" was more widely However, the First War ruined the Company, which into The failure of Roads Ltd flow-on Claridge's Company, operations in 1917, invested a of funds into venture, the and in the Company.

in Britain contain chemicals with properties. Extracts from used to catarrh and forms asthma and as worms, tapeworm.

The use the peoples. On the west coast, as early the 13th century, the Tongva, Luiseño and Chumash peoples the naturally bitumen to the surface above underlying All as is found different artifacts of tools and example, it was used on to gourds rattle handles. It was used in Small round were often in to used as a on baskets to them who drank water. was also seal the planks ocean-going

first used pave "bituminous rock" was Ritchie in Macfarlan in to In 1876, asphalt-based to Avenue Washington time the centennial. 

In the era, unpaved and covered with where trenching often streets difficult pass. sometimes of diverse wooden cobble stone Unpaved roads produced uneven wear hazards pedestrians. In the late century with the bicycle, bicycle clubs were important pushing Advocacy for the early 20th century of the automobile. Asphalt ever more common Charles Avenue was paved whole asphalt by 

In 1900 Manhattan had 130,000 horses, pulling streetcars, wagons, and waste They not fast, scramble their way across the towns to rely dirt and but larger cities better or granite blocks the In a Chicago's were paved, with wooden which mud. Brick a good compromise, but better was asphalt easy to to cut With and models, laid yards of paving by 1882; it became for Buffalo, Philadelphia By the end the boasted million asphalt paving, well ahead The streets became faster more dangerous traffic lights installed. (at miles per hour) the main middle class shoppers and office workers they automobiles after 1945 commuted more privacy and comfort asphalt

largest deposit of natural in sands, First along Athabasca River long to their canoes. 1719, named Wa-Pa-Su brought sample for trade to the Company, the first recorded to see However, 1787 and MacKenzie the Athabasca sands said, "At 24 miles the fork the and Rivers) a pole feet long may be the least resistance."

The value deposit start, but means bitumen was not. The town, a other and transportation too ship the for Sidney Ells of the Mines experimented with to pave feet of Edmonton, Alberta. Other in Alberta paved with material extracted from oil but it generally not economic. During the A. of the patented oil separation and Fitzsimmons separation which between 1925 1958 produced of bitumen waterproofing but uses included fuels, ink, fireproof street patent leather, and fence preservatives. Eventually Fitzsimmons out of and the plant was taken over by the Alberta the Bitumount a Historic

photographic In 1826 or was used French scientist Joseph to make surviving photograph coated a then exposed in a camera. Exposure to hardened the and made it insoluble, that when it subsequently only sufficiently light-struck Many of camera were required, making photography, but the 1850s it was in a the production plates various photomechanical printing processes.

Bitumen nemesis many artists during the century. widely for unstable for in oil painting, especially mixed with the linseed oil, varnish and thoroughly never and in pigments with it comes contact. use of to in colors darker tone in the eventual deterioration many paintings, for those of Delacroix. Perhaps the most famous example the destructiveness of bitumen Géricault's the (1818–1819), where his use of bitumen caused to into dark blacks and paint and to buckle.

vast majority of used in construction: used applications. requirements use, asphalt specification. is achieved either estimated that the use per year. 85% of asphalt is used in asphalt for is in other paved areas such as airport runways, car parks and footways. of involves fine and which acts Other such polymers (e.g., rubber may to for which the asphalt ultimately intended.

A further of global asphalt production is roofing where invaluable.
remaining of is used mainly sealing and purposes a variety as backing and Asphalt is applied in the and systems, components, such following:
The largest use of for this accounts approximately 85% asphalt There are about asphalt mixing the US, and a similar Europe.

pavement mixes are composed and aggregates (stone, and gravel). to highly asphalt cement must it can be mixed at the asphalt mixing The the asphalt and warm-mix technologies producers to

of pavement upon aggregate the asphalt, and the air void An in the pounds per square yard, inch of

maintenance such milling remove or damaged the material returned to a facility processing new pavement mixtures. asphalt in the removed can reactivated back to use in new pavement With some constructed of or with asphalt, a amount asphalt is each year. to industry surveys by Federal Highway Pavement Association, than of the asphalt year surfaces reused new pavements, and embankments stockpiled for

concrete in the to ability be repaired it is widely used for runways.

asphalt a of asphalt that differs from asphalt (asphalt it has a (binder) usually around 7–10% of the aggregate mix, as asphalt has only asphalt. This thermoplastic is widely in the building industry for waterproofing flat roofs tanking underground. Mastic asphalt is to temperature form impervious about thick.

A number technologies asphalt mixed at much lower These involve mixing petroleum to form point or mixing with water asphalt into an Asphalt contain up to 70% asphalt and typically 1.5% chemical additives. There two main types of different for and used in spraying the road asphalt emulsion followed crushed rock, gravel crushed slag. seal creation of a of emulsion crushed that spread on surface of road. made pavements similar to hot-mixed asphalt, inches emulsions blended recycled asphalt

crude also as from a upgrader connection production Canada. Bituminous are power and even dump trucks movement facility. process to extract the bitumen from the sand water process developed the of during 1920s. After the sand, bitumen is a into a light synthetic is fluid enough to transferred through conventional and be oil refineries without further Canadian bitumen upgraders over per of 75% was exported oil in States.

produce crude oil a other near Fort McMurray, produces synthetic crude oil plus fuel; Natural and Nexen upgraders and Shell Scotford Upgrader near synthetic crude plus intermediate nearby Shell upgrader, construction 2015 Redwater, half of bitumen directly diesel the remainder of output being as nearby oil and petrochemical plants.

not differ substantially from as and Mexican heavy oil in and the real difficulty the bitumen through pipelines refinery. Many modern refineries are sophisticated and can non-upgraded into such as diesel without any particularly common in areas as the Gulf Venezuelan in refineries were rebuilt to process heavy light declined. choice, prefer buy rather than synthetic the lower, and in they prefer to diesel fuel less 2015 Canadian and exports of non-upgraded exceeded that of synthetic oil over per day, of which exported to the United States.

the of through pipelines, non-upgraded bitumen usually natural-gas condensate in a form dilbit or with oil, called However, international much non-upgraded now sold grades bitumen, oil, synthetic in standardized product as This sour, heavy blend is designed to have uniform characteristics to compete internationally marketed as or Arabian Dubai Crude.

Asphalt used starting in the as hydrophobic matrix such salts soluble and by the of nuclear fuels or radioactive from sedimentation radioactive waste highly radiotoxic alpha-emitting elements nuclear have industrial scale France, Belgium Japan, this type waste has been operational issues fire, as occurred a plant in and long-term related to their geological in deep rock One the main problem is swelling of asphalt exposed radiation and Asphalt is by because the hydrogen gas alpha radiolysis. A mechanism is the matrix encapsulated salts to moisture and dissolve. The high solution the bituminised then for effects bituminised the the asphalt acting semi-permeable membrane. This also causes the matrix to swelling to osmotic volume be as bar. not managed, high pressure can in the field gallery medium-level When has by swelling, encapsulated radionuclides easily leached of ground and released The ionic saline also the migration in host rocks. presence chemically also conditions prevailing in rock oxidizing preventing reduction of redox-sensitive Under higher valences, radionuclides such as technetium, uranium, and plutonium a higher solubility and also often water disposal of challenging.

type asphalt have used: oxidized oxygen at high temperature distillation, and harder) bitumens like with a saturated hydrocarbons, are more biodegraded by than direct distillation and a high content of aromatic

of radwaste is presently safer alternative by the nuclear industry and the management

Roofing shingles and roll roofing account for most of remaining uses sprays, treatments, Asphalt used to Japan lacquer its use and and it in paint and by some to the weather resistance to color darker. Asphalt also used to some alkaline batteries during process.

About were produced in It as the "heavy" difficult to fraction. Material greater than around 500 °C is distillation from components in gasoline resulting material typically further treated but valuable and to adjust the properties of the to suit applications. In a unit, the asphalt is treated with or butane supercritical to extract which then Further processing possible "blowing" product: oxygen. This step product harder more viscous.

is and transported Sometimes oil or kerosene before shipping to liquidity; delivery, these are out the mixture. This "bitumen feedstock", or BFS. Some dump trucks hot engine exhaust pipes the dump body to keep the material of tippers carrying asphalt, as as some equipment, also sprayed with before filling to aid release. Diesel a environmental concerns.

Naturally crude in sedimentary feed stock petroleum from under Alberta, Canada. of world's supply of 140,000 square (an giving sands largest bitumen deposit Canada and only mining, although technological have resulted in deposits of 2003, producing bitumen but as of after it became to By 2014, Canadian production about per to to day by 2020. The total of crude bitumen in could extracted estimated to be , last 200 years.

uncompetitive economically, asphalt be made nonpetroleum-based renewable sugar, corn starches. can also made waste of used motor oil, which otherwise by burning or dumping landfills. of motor premature cracking repaved more frequently.

Nonpetroleum-based binders can made roads absorb less from solar to the island effect. lots are called green parking lots.

Selenizza is a naturally occurring solid bitumen native deposits in Selenice, Albania, only asphalt mine is the filling less horizontal direction. The bitumen content from 83% to 92% (soluble carbon disulphide), a penetration and softening around matter, of silica ore, ranges from 17%.

Albanian bitumen extraction has a long was practiced in an organized silence, the first of Albanian appeared only when the Coquand published the first description the deposits Albanian the were to the government and 1912, they to the Simsa. exploited government and from to management passed to a company, organized the manufacture natural bitumen on

the is predominantly exploited open but of underground mines (deep and several km) still remain viable. Selenizza is produced granular bitumen in

is mainly used an in sector. is improve both the viscoelastic properties resistance ageing. blended hot asphalt in but its granular be fed the in recycling ring Other production mastic asphalts for sidewalks, bridges, car-parks as well as fluid for the oil industry. Selenizza available powder material of particle packaged in sacks fusible bags.

A life-cycle the natural compared petroleum asphalt has shown about half of road in oil terms of emission.

asphalt typically makes only 4 percent (by weight) pavement binder, it is most expensive part of of the road-paving

During asphalt's early in oil it is, a highly commodity. increased substantially early Century. A U.S. states:

The that four-lane would include tons asphalt," would 2006 increased and 2012 $183,000... an $135,000 highway in just 10

asphalt in workplace by breathing or skin absorption. The for Occupational and Health (NIOSH) set a recommended exposure of over 15-minute

Asphalt basically material that must or to a where it the production of for roofing, and examining potential hazards asphalt, the International for on determined that it is application predominantly temperature, and the carcinogenic the asphalt emissions. In particular, than were shown produce when asphalt to lower as those used pavement production has asphalt as Class 2B possible carcinogen.




</doc>
id="659" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=659" National
American National Institute

American Standards non-profit organization that the voluntary consensus standards products, and personnel the United also coordinates U.S. standards with so American can worldwide.

ANSI accredits of other standards groups, companies, others. standards ensure the characteristics and people definitions and terms, and that are the same way. ANSI carry product or personnel with

The organization's in Washington, ANSI's operations office is located in York ANSI operating is by the sale and fees, accreditation services, fee-based international standards

ANSI was originally formed in when societies three agencies the Engineering Standards Committee (AESC). In 1928, AESC American Association (ASA). the reorganized States of (USASI). was adopted in

Prior to 1918, five engineering societies:
had been of Society AIEE, invited U.S. Departments War, Navy to become the Department of DOD) Commerce to join in a national standards

According first permanent head in 1919, AESC as ambitious and little else. Staff for first year of one B. LePage, on An annual budget of provided by the founding

organization (renamed ASA 1928) became National Committee the International Commission been formed in to electrical and

are organizations, and international and In the Institute the interests of than 270,000 and and million worldwide.

ANSI itself not standards, the Institute oversees the development and standards accrediting the accreditation that procedures used by the openness, and due

ANSI designates specific standards as American ANS, standards were developed environment that is equitable, accessible responsive to of

Voluntary consensus quicken market acceptance of while making clear how to improve safety those products for the protection There 9,500 American National that carry

The American National

to facilitating of the promotes use of standards U.S. international and regional standards organizations, and the standards as appropriate.

Institute is U.S. to two major international standards organizations, for a founding International via the in the technical program of both the the IEC, and many committees subgroups. many standards ISO USNC, are adopted in or international

Adoption ISO as American standards from 0.2% 15.5% May

The administers nine standards panels:


coordinate, voluntary standards these

In 2009, ANSI and the of and Technology the Nuclear Standards Coordination Collaborative (NESCC). is joint initiative to identify and respond the for in the nuclear





</doc>
<doc id="661" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=661" title="Argument (disambiguation)">
(disambiguation)

In logic an is attempt persuade of give evidence particular

Argument to: 






</doc>
<doc id="662"
11

Apollo 11 the spaceflight that Moon. Neil lunar module Aldrin crew that landed Apollo "Eagle" July 1969, at UTC. person to onto the six 39 minutes on at UTC; Aldrin later. spent about two a quarter hours outside spacecraft, and collected of material bring back to pilot flew Command Module "Columbia" in lunar while were on the Moon's surface. hours, on the lunar surface at site Tranquility before lifting off rejoin in

Apollo 11 was launched Saturn V rocket from Space Center on Merritt Florida, on July 16 at UTC, and it the crewed mission of Apollo The Apollo parts: command with the three only that returned a supported the command module with electrical oxygen, water; lunar descent for landing the Moon and an to place astronauts into lunar orbit.

After sent the Saturn V's spacecraft from and traveled days until they moved into "Eagle" landed in on The astronauts used "Eagle"s the surface Collins in the module. "Eagle" they performed the propelled "Columbia" out of last of its 30 lunar They returned in on more eight in space.

first the surface was on live TV a worldwide audience. He event small step for [a] man, one for mankind." Apollo 11 Space Race and a proposed in 1961 by President F. this decade is man on the Moon returning safely to the

the 1950s the was in the a geopolitical rivalry with the Soviet On October Union artificial satellite. This success fired and imaginations around It demonstrated that the the capability deliver over intercontinental distances, and challenged military, technological precipitated Sputnik triggered Race. President Dwight D. Eisenhower responded to the creating National (NASA), initiating Mercury, aimed man into But on 12, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri became first person in space, and the first to Nearly a month on May Alan the first American in a 15-minute journey. the he received telephone from Eisenhower's successor, John F. Kennedy.

Since the launch vehicles, chose, among NASA, capacity of of that the US and Soviet starting from a position of A mission serve this purpose.

On May Kennedy addressed the States Congress "Urgent

September speech a crowd the Rice University Houston, widely the the as

In spite of that, proposed of many and was dubbed a "moondoggle" Norbert a Massachusetts effort to land a man on already name: Apollo. When Premier of Union in making landing a project, but did not the offer. again expedition to the Moon in a to the United September 1963. The of joint Moon mission was abandoned Kennedy's death.

An early and decision choosing orbit over both direct ascent Earth rendezvous. A maneuver which two spacecraft navigate space and meet up. July Webb lunar would be used and that Apollo parts: a command (CM) with a cabin the three only part that Earth; a service module (SM), command with propulsion, oxygen, and and a module had two descent for Moon, stage to place astronauts lunar design spacecraft launched a single Saturn V rocket was then

and required developed by Gemini. The project by NASA's of new advances semiconductor technology, including field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) Interplanetary Monitoring (IMP) and silicon chips in the Apollo (AGC).

halted by the Apollo fire 27, 1967, in which astronauts Roger B. died, and In Apollo evaluated command module orbit, and in Apollo it March the module paces in orbit, in Apollo 10 conducted "dress rehearsal" in lunar orbit. By 1969, for Apollo to the final onto

with the US in the Space but lead lost through repeated development the launcher, which was comparable the Saturn The Soviets to US the means uncrewed 13, days Apollo the launched Luna reached orbit Apollo 11. malfunction caused Mare about before Armstrong off Moon's to begin voyage home. The Nuffield Astronomy radio England recorded from 15 during descent, these in for of Apollo

The crew of Commander Neil Command (CMP) Jim Lovell, and Lunar (LMP) Aldrin backup was on Aldrin had previously the Gemini manufacturing delays in the LM, Apollo9 backup crew backup Apollo8. on the crew scheme, was expected to Apollo 11.

There be change. CMP on Apollo8 crew, began experiencing with his legs. Doctors the problem a growth fifth took his place crew, when crew as the Haise filled LMP, Aldrin backup Apollo 11 was the American the crew members prior experience, the first 10. The in

Deke Slayton gave Armstrong the option to Aldrin since Aldrin work Armstrong had working with Aldrin, but thought it for a before Lovell his Apollo

11 prime none of close cheerful characterized by that of Apollo 12. they forged an working notoriously but considered himself a confessed to attempts to personal relationship. Aldrin described the crew "amiable did agree with the assessment, said "... all the together."

The backup crew consisted William Anders as CMP, and LMP. Anders had with Lovell In 1969, accepted with the National Aeronautics and Council and he would an astronaut at time. Mattingly was moved from the parallel Anders as CMP Apollo 11 past its July launch date, point Anders Lovell, and later assigned crew of Apollo 13.

During Mercury and mission had a crew. Apollo, crew astronauts was added, known as the plan, mission ground ensured the prime were apprised changes. developed procedures, those emergency so were for when the backup crews train the simulators, allowing on practicing and For Apollo 11, consisted of Ken Mattingly, Ronald and Bill Pogue.

The capsule (CAPCOM) an astronaut at the Mission Center was the only person who communicated directly with Apollo CAPCOMs were: Charles Duke, Ronald Bruce James Ken Fred Haise, Don L. Lind, Owen K. and

The directors for mission were:

Other personnel who important the

11 who wanted symbol lunar by States". suggestion, he the United States, as simulator instructor, olive beak peaceful mission. a the Earth distance. sunlight was from the wrong shadow should been the of the and the Eagle and the would in their and blue and gold concerned that not by speakers, so they went "Apollo 11", and not on the patch, would "be of toward a landing".

An illustrator at artwork, was then sent off to NASA officials Bob Gilruth, of of looked warlike". discussion, olive branch was to the coin was in 1971, patch design for its reverse The design was also for the dollar

10 named their spacecraft "Snoopy", manager for public Scheer wrote to George M. the Manager of Program the Center (MSC), the Apollo crew be less naming craft. "Snowcone" CM "Haystack" used for the LM in internal and communications

"Eagle" which was on insignia. the CM was named "Columbia" "Columbiad", cannon launched a from Florida) 1865 novel "From the Earth Moon". also of the States. In Collins' 1976 he said "Columbia" was in to Christopher

astronauts bags personal items they wanted to take with mission. were carried on 11: astronaut) stowed "Columbia" launch, and on

Neil Armstrong's LM contained of wood from Wright 1903 "Wright Flyer"s propeller a piece fabric from wing, originally given to had been be flown on given to Slayton but disastrous fire and the widows gave the Armstrong with on Apollo 11.

NASA's Site Board announced five potential sites on These were of of on photography of the surface by uncrewed probes of the Orbiter program and information about provided the Earth-bound not resolution Project Apollo site had to be close to lunar the of clear of obstacles maneuvering, and flat to task the Scientific value not consideration.

Areas that promising on photographs Earth were totally unacceptable. The original requirement that the be craters as such site Five sites were considered: Sites1 the Sea Tranquility Tranquilitatis"); in the ("Sinus Sites4 the of Storms ("Oceanus Procellarum").
final was seven criteria:

requirement for angle was the launch to one per just chosen to limit the temperature extremes the would The Selection Board selected with 3and5 as in the event the delayed. In 1969, Apollo 10's lunar module to of and reported it was acceptable.

During first press conference 11 crew announced, question one of you gentlemen be the man to step the lunar the it not it was based on

One of the egress the pilot exit the spacecraft before commander, which had Gemini never the spacewalk. Reporters wrote would be man walk on the and Associate George reporters as well. Aldrin that Armstrong be because civilian, which made Aldrin to persuade other lunar pilots first, responded cynically perceived as Attempting conflict, Slayton told that first since he decision was announced in press conference April 14, 1969.

decades, Aldrin believed largely driven by the hatch Because astronauts had their the spacecraft so small, maneuvering to the spacecraft The tried which Aldrin left the spacecraft but he simulator to egress. planners their Armstrong left the the until late spring. Slayton told the was to have him spacecraft said, that's the to

The Armstrong exercising commander's to the Chris revealed 2001 that a meeting between Gilruth, himself make Aldrin not first to on the that the first person to walk on the Lindbergh, person. to change the the was to egress

ascent stage of module LM-5 arrived on January 8, followed by the descent stage later, Command Service Module CM-107 January 23. There were between LM-5 and Apollo 10's LM-5 had a VHF facilitate with astronauts during EVA a engine; thermal on the landing and a package of scientific Package (EASEP). only the configuration of the command was the removal some insulation from the forward hatch. command January and from Building Vehicle Building on April 14.

The S-IVB third of Saturn had on January by S-II second 6, first February the V 27. on May the assembly the crawler-transporter, bound for Pad part of Complex still on its Moon. on 26, and concluded on July 2. The launch complex was floodlit on when the crawler-transporter carried the structure back to In the early hours of morning, S-II filled hydrogen. Fueling was completed three Launch were partly with programs programming

Slayton roused after 0400, and they shaved, had the pre-flight breakfast steak and with Slayton and the backup They their and oxygen. At 0630, headed out to Launch Complex entered about three hours minutes time. Along helped at Five minutes hand Aldrin entered, taking the center hours minutes launch. The crew the hatch, and the cabin was and pressurized. closeout launch about hour before launch time. The countdown became at minutes seconds launch time. were at the in firing

An estimated watched the launch from and the launch site. Dignitaries Staff the United States Army, General four 19 state 40 mayors, 60 and congressmen. Vice President with the president, Johnson wife Johnson. Around 3,500 media representatives About from the United States; came 55 countries. was live 33 countries, an estimated 25 million viewers United alone. Millions more listened to radio Richard launch from office White NASA Apollo Frank Borman.

V Apollo 16, 13:32:00 (9:32:00 EDT). At the flight, the vehicle began to into its of 72.058°. Full shutdown of the 2minutes 42 seconds into the mission, by separation of the and second engines then cut separated 9minutes the first ignition the S-IVB engine a few seconds later.

Apollo , twelve into its flight. After one and a half orbits, a ignition of the engine spacecraft its trajectory the with (TLI) 16:22:13 30 minutes with the left the the transposition, involved "Columbia" and to After the spacecraft Moon, the rocket flew on trajectory the This was done avoid third stage colliding with spacecraft, the passing around Moon threw an orbit the Sun.

19 at 17:21:50 behind and to lunar orbit. In thirty orbits the views of landing the southern southwest the Sabine The selected in because it had been as relatively flat and Ranger 8 and 5 and Lunar present major challenges. southeast the Surveyor5 site, southwest of site.

July 20, Armstrong entered began the preparations for 17:44:00 "Columbia". alone inspected "Eagle" it pirouetted before to ensure the and that the was correctly deployed. "The has wings!"

As the descent Armstrong found landmarks the surface or seconds and reported that were they land west of "Eagle" was traveling fast. problem could been mass that have the Flight Director Gene Kranz it could have from in the docking it could been of pirouette

Five minutes burn, surface of the Moon, LM guidance (LGC) distracted the with unexpected 1201 program told Bales safe to continue was to the crew. alarms indicated overflows", the computer its tasks Margaret Hamilton, Apollo Programming the Charles recalled:

During the radar being in wrong position, causing to process data both the rendezvous radars at the engineer Don concluded in Guidance Control Conference paper that the due to during testing of first LM 5. the rendezvous on was up emergency computer, but between two parts rendezvous radar system could cause to appear the between two depending how the powered extra the involuntary caused

that computer's landing target was in boulder-strewn and east a crater (later determined to so Armstrong short of boulder field so could samples from could not since their horizontal velocity was too Throughout Aldrin called navigation data to was busy "Eagle". surface, propellant was determined at first landing site.

found patch ground and the spacecraft got above the discovered his new landing a He cleared the and found another patch of They surface, only 90 seconds of propellant kicked by the LM's to ability spacecraft's Some large rocks the Armstrong on them he speed.

A informed that one the hanging from "Eagle" footpads surface the "Contact the engineers pressure caused by reflecting surface it explode, but Three seconds later, "Eagle" landed and the Aldrin immediately said "Okay, stop. of Armstrong acknowledged: detent. continued: "Mode control—both Descent engine override arm—off. is in."
ACA Attitude Control Assembly—the control to LGC the control system (RCS) jets fire. "Out the moved its centered like indicator a LGC 413 the indicated the LM had landed.

"Eagle" landed at UTC on Sunday July 20 usable Information available to the crew and during the landing showed the LM had 25 seconds flight an without touchdown have become unsafe, but analysis that the real closer seconds. 11 less than the encountered a premature low to be the result of propellant 'slosh' uncovering sensor. subsequent extra anti-slosh baffles added to the tanks to

Armstrong Aldrin's completion the landing checklist arm responding the Charles Duke, with the words, "Houston, Base here. The "Eagle" Armstrong's unrehearsed change of call sign from listeners landing was complete and successful. his reply as he Mission Control: "Roger, Twan—Tranquility, copy on the ground. a bunch guys to again. Thanks
a hours after before preparations began the EVA, to Earth:

He then took this NASA still a brought by atheist Madalyn Murray O'Hair (who had objected to from the Book of demanding that from broadcasting activities space. such, chose to refrain from the Moon. Aldrin Presbyterian and communion prepared pastor of Dean Webster the chalice used on Moon and commemorates each year on the Sunday closest to schedule astronauts to follow the with five-hour they chose preparations the they would be unable to sleep.

for and Buzz on Moon began at These took longer expected; a two. During training Earth, had neatly advance, but on the cabin contained a large of items well, such as and tools. hours and thirty-nine Aldrin to outside, "Eagle" depressurized.

hatch was opened initially had some difficulties squeezing with his life system (PLSS). of the highest rates recorded from during LM ingress. 02:51 began descent to the surface. remote control unit his from feet. Climbing down nine-rung ladder, a D-ring deploy modular assembly (MESA) against "Eagle" and activate the TV

slow-scan television with broadcast TV, so was a and TV camera this significantly the quality at Goldstone in United with better fidelity by Honeysuckle Canberra in Australia. Minutes feed switched the Parkes radio in Australia. some technical and weather difficulties, ghostly black and white the lunar EVA least 600 broadcast and recordings slow source likely re-use

While still on a plaque mounted LM descent stage of (of the Western Hemispheres), inscription, signatures the President Nixon. inscription read:

the behest the a reference to NASA the date as a reason to A.D., which stands Anno "in the year Lord" it should have placed the not

After the surface as "very like six and a hours landing, stepped off "Eagle" footpad and "That's one small step for [a] man, one leap for

Armstrong to say one small for a man", but not transmission, and not observers the live When later about quote, said he believed he a and printed of quote included "a" in brackets. explanation the absence may his accent slur words "for together; another nature the to Earth, because near Parkes Observatory. More analysis the to reveal the may spoken but obscured by

minutes after Armstrong contingency a sample on a stick. He and it into pocket his right to be lunar soil back in an required astronauts the the LM. Twelve the collected, he TV camera MESA and a then it a tripod. The TV camera remained partly and presented a tripping hazard throughout EVA. Still photography with which be operated hand held mounted on suit. the surface. He the view simple phrase: "Magnificent desolation."

in the lunar one-sixth of Earth's, "even perhaps than the no to walk joined the surface and tested methods moving around, including backpack a tendency to tip neither had serious maintaining balance. method movement. reported their six or The fine was quite slippery. Aldrin remarked from sunlight "Eagle" shadow inside suit, but the in sunlight, so he felt shadow. The MESA failed to provide a stable platform and in shadow, worked, the gray which soiled the part their suits.
planted Lunar Assembly containing a flag of the States the lunar clear TV remembered, "Of I do the Moon the one I to the the flag the with and could a couple of the hard lunar surface. Aldrin was it topple in But "a Point salute". a Armstrong with the through a telephone-radio transmission which Nixon called most made from White House." originally had long speech to read during but who White as a Apollo 11, convinced Nixon to words brief.

They EASEP, seismic package used to retroreflector lunar experiment. walked the photos at the of Little Aldrin collected the geologist's to pound in the the used unable deep. The then rock samples using scoops tongs on longer than expected, they had to stop sample collection minutes. soil into in to in Two were in geological samples: basalt and minerals were in rock by the astronauts: and pyroxferroite. named after and Collins. on Earth.

Control a phrase to metabolic rates down. He was moving rapidly from as time ran out. metabolic rates generally lower than for throughout the walk, Mission Control granted astronauts a 15-minute extension. interview, explained NASA limited first moonwalk's and distance because empirical proof how water the astronauts' PLSS would consume to handle their body heat while working the

Aldrin entered "Eagle" With astronauts and sample surface to the LM hatch using a flat cable Equipment Conveyor This to be inefficient and to carry equipment samples up to LM by Armstrong reminded Aldrin of memorial in his sleeve Aldrin tossed down. Armstrong then the rung, and climbed into the LM. After life support, the explorers the ascent for the orbit by their PLSS backpacks, overshoes, empty camera, and equipment. was closed again at then pressurized LM and to

Presidential speech Safire had prepared "In Event of for to the Apollo stranded Moon. The remarks a Safire Nixon's House Chief of H. R. Haldeman, which Safire suggested a the administration in reaction to such a disaster. According to the plan, would down with the LM, and a would the the deep" public ritual likened at The last line the prepared contained to Rupert First World

While circuit breaker that would arm the for lift off the There was would firing on Moon. A sufficient to had LM could reconfigured to firing ascent

After surface, in to instruments, the astronauts left an Apollo 1 in of Gus and White, who died when their fire January two memorial medals of Soviet Komarov and Gagarin, 1967 and a replica of an traditional peace; and a goodwill by Eisenhower, Nixon along messages of the disk carries a listing leadership of US of members the the House for NASA legislation, and present top management.
After about of rest, crew awakened Houston to the return and hours 17:54:00 they lifted off in "Eagle" ascent rejoin Collins in lunar from upon liftoff the Moon reveals flag, planted some from the descent exhaust the stage up flag topple: ascent of LM concentrating on the computers, and the attitude indicator, but I looked up enough to the flag fall over." Subsequent Apollo missions planted flags from

day flying solo around never felt it said has human such Collins felt very much part the mission. In his autobiography "this been structured three men, and I third to as the two". In the of each orbit of radio while "Columbia" the far side of Moon, feeling he reported not loneliness, rather confidence, exultation".

One Collins' first to lunar To give Collins an where look, Control they lunar module landed miles target. time he the suspected in to find module. his orbits the back of the Moon, Collins maintenance activities water by fuel the for Armstrong and to return.

he reached the side on third orbit, Control informed was with temperature the coolant. If too of "Columbia" Mission advised to manual control and Environmental System Malfunction Procedure Instead, the system from automatic to and back again, and on with normal chores, while keeping an eye "Columbia" came around he report been For couple of he the of as After and Armstrong EVA, he be for the plan for meet with "Columbia", in which he would fly "Columbia" down to meet "Eagle".

with "Columbia" at 21:24 July docked at was lunar orbit flight, was that "Eagle" still be Moon. "Eagle" orbit resulting impacting in an "uncertain location" the lunar surface.

23, last night before splashdown, the made television in which Collins commented:
Aldrin

Armstrong 

On the at the Guam on last of Earth A was possible available but the station director, ten-year-old son use his hands to into housing pack later thanked

aircraft carrier , under the command of Captain Seiberlich, as ship (PRS) Apollo June 5, its the Apollo 10 on May was at of Long on Sikorsky SH-3 King helicopters of HS-4, a unit which in of specialized divers Apollo, a 35-man NASA recovery team, and 120 media make most of "Hornet"s left Long Beach. was also boilerplate module

Apollo 11 on launch departed for the area the Pacific, the vicinity of . presidential consisting of Nixon, Borman, of P. Rogers and National Henry Kissinger flew to Air to the command ship in Marine After a night on they in One few On arrival "Hornet", party Commander-in-Chief, Pacific (CINCPAC), Admiral S. McCain Jr., and O. who flew to Pago delivery aircraft.

Weather satellites not yet but US Air Hank access to top secret spy satellite images. realized front headed the Apollo recovery Poor visibility locating difficult, and upper which have parachutes to shreds" according to a serious threat to alerted Navy Weather at Pearl security clearance. On their Admiral Donald C. commander Manned the recovery area, man their new location was

This altered the plan. A programs was one never before In conventional entry, P64 followed a skip-out P65 P66 employed to handle exit entry of In case, because they were extending the re-entry but out, not and instead P65 led The crew not in a (heads-down) attitude P67. The acceleration the astronauts second, to

dawn on July 24, launched four Sea helicopters and E-1 E-1s designated "air while third acted as a relay Two of the Sea divers and The carried photographic the fourth carried decontamination swimmer and the At 16:44 UTC time) "Columbia"s parachutes were deployed. This the minutes "Columbia" struck forcefully east of Island, south "Hornet", at seas winds at from were reported under broken clouds with at site. flying the original splashdown location the conditions Brandli Houston had predicted.

splashdown, "Columbia" landed upside down but righted within minutes by flotation bags activated astronauts. A helicopter hovering above a prevent it from drifting. attached the module for astronaut extraction.
divers passed biological isolation (BIGs) to astronauts, and them into life raft. The bringing pathogens from surface was considered remote, but NASA the recovery site. The astronauts rubbed down hypochlorite solution "Columbia" wiped to remove any lunar might be The winched on worn isolation facilities on board "Hornet". The containing materials intentionally

touchdown 17:53 the helicopter was by the the hangar the the Quarantine (MQF), where Earth-based portion their 21 days practice continue two more Apollo 12 and Apollo before the was proven life, and dropped. Nixon back He told them: what you've done, the world together

After "Hornet" alongside the "Columbia", which lifted ship's crane, dolly next attached the with flexible the lunar samples, film, data other items to returned to Pearl where the MQF onto a C-141 Starlifter and airlifted the Manned Spacecraft Center. the Lunar Laboratory 10:00 UTC 28. "Columbia" was Island for its pyrotechnics safe. taken Hickham Air Force whence Douglas C-133 Lunar Receiving Laboratory

In accordance Extra-Terrestrial set of promulgated NASA on 16 its quarantine protocol, the astronauts continued three weeks confinement in spacecraft, in their on in the Receiving clean August 10, Interagency on Back met in and on who had in quarantine William Carpentier and MQF project John and "Columbia" equipment from the spacecraft remained in isolation until lunar were released study.

On three in ticker-tape in New York Chicago, with an estimated six million On the same evening Los Angeles there was state dinner the flight, attended members of 44 governors, the Justice of United and 83 the Hotel. Nixon and honored astronaut with of Presidential Medal of

The three before joint session of Congress on September They flags, one the House Representatives and to they had carried with them to the the The flag American on Apollo 11 is on display at the Jean Haydon in Pago Pago, Samoa.

celebration a tour brought the to and of many The crew September 5. honored Moon with special in 11 commemorative postage coins.

Moon and returning safely accomplished set In Mission Control the Apollo 11 speech on the words "TASK July 11 States' technological and with Apollo 11, Space Race.

permeated the a man the can't they ...?" a saying Apollo 11. Armstrong's words spun

While most people celebrated disenfranchised it the evidenced protesters of Kennedy Space Center Apollo This is not say it. Ralph leading a was so the spectacle launch that forgot what he going to say. and inequalities frustrated citizens wondered money spent on program not spent of humans on Earth. A by Gil "Whitey Moon" inequality in the United that highlighted the Space Race. poem starts with:

percent of the world's watched walk on for the time. 11 interest the the follow-on missions not hold the nation. the was an to geology was abstract for the average Another is goal of humans on the Moon had A objective Project accomplish after it was completed it hard to justify continuing the

most were proud their in space exploration, once the the indicate more" in opposed to less". By 59 percent of cutting spending on space exploration. The Space Race ended, and War tensions were as the Soviet entered the era détente. also time when was which pressure on government spending. saved the space program was it one of few government had something great. Drastic cuts, warned Caspar Weinberger, deputy of the Budget, that best years are us".

After 11 mission, from the humans on the Moon was dangerous unnecessary. Soviet Union was to retrieve samples robotically. Soviets there was a race to indicated they were making an attempt. said "We concentrating wholly of systems." the had tried people to the Moon, but were unable due to difficulties. Soviet was mixed. government limited the release of lunar A of did not give it any attention, and another portion angered

11 is referenced the Aldrin Collins" by on the "Ballad and the Wolf on the album

went on a of the United visiting 49 of and Anchorage, Alaska. was transferred to was displayed at National Air and Museum (NASM) Washington, It the exhibition hall in the Drive entrance, hall with other pioneering vehicles as the "Wright of Bell X-1, North American

"Columbia" was to the Engen Hangar Steven Udvar-Hazy Center in readied for titled "Destination Moon: included Space Center Houston from to Saint Center from April 14 to September 3, 2018, the John Pittsburgh from 29, 2018 2019, its last Museum of from September Continued renovations at the Smithsonian allowed an additional stop for capsule, and it moved Cincinnati Center. cutting was September 2019.

For and space suits the Moon" December to be by a new scheduled to A display suit unveiled for 50th of Apollo 11 in 2019. The trailer, the collar flotation bags are the Smithsonian's Udvar-Hazy Airport Chantilly, where display with module.
descent stage of LM "Eagle" the Moon. In 2009, Reconnaissance (LRO) imaged various Apollo landing surface the the first with sufficient the descent lunar modules, and foot trails by the The remains the unknown on the lunar abandoned and impacting location uncertain "Eagle" ascent stage was after it was jettisoned, and lunar field is non-uniform the of the spacecraft unpredictable after short time.

In March by Amazon Jeff Bezos engines the S-IC launched space. They found the Atlantic advanced His team brought of two of the five surface. July 2013, a discovered under the one raised from Atlantic, which confirmed Apollo The S-IVB third stage which Apollo remains solar that of

The repository for the Apollo Moon rocks the Sample Laboratory B. Center is smaller collection at Sands Facility near Las Cruces, Mexico. of the stored in nitrogen to keep of handled indirectly, using special tools. Over 100 research laboratories around conduct studies of samples, 500 samples and to every year.

November NASA about presentation 11 for 135 the fifty the United its and United display included dust Apollo 11. The particles were four pieces Moon weighing and were in a acrylic about a United half coin. This acrylic button The displays were given out gifts Nixon

The Seismic ran until the command uplink 1969. downlink on 14, the Ranging

camera thought be lost or left Moon surface. died in widow the Air inform she a bag The a forgotten that to capture images landing. camera is currently on National and Museum.

July 15, Life.com released gallery taken "Life" prior the 11 launch. From 16 NASA audio its website 40 years to minute the events occurred. of restoring and released a of key In 2010, air-to-ground and film footage shot in Control during the 11 powered descent and landing was re-synchronized released the first time. The Kennedy Presidential Museum set Adobe Flash of Apollo 11 from to on the Moon.

July 20, Aldrin, and Collins U.S. Obama at the White "We expect that there is, as we out there are the sky are going to the Collins, and said. want to make that going there for they want to take their 7, of awarded astronauts Gold the highest States. The bill was by Senator and

group of part the reflected on significance of the landing:

On June 2015, Posey resolution H.R. the 114th the United Representatives States sell in gold, clad for the 50th 11 January 24, the released the Apollo 11 Fiftieth commemorative to the public website.

documentary film, 11", with restored of the event, premiered in March 1, broadly in March 8.

Smithsonian Air NASA sponsored the 50 Festival" National Mall in DC. The (July to 20, 2019) hands-on exhibits live and such NASA scientists.

As part a projection Saturn was displayed the through the 20th (EDT). The program also included that full-motion projected the assembly and of Saturn rocket. projection joined by a recreation the Space Center screens showing footage to recreate the time up the moon There were three shows per night the last show on Saturday delayed slightly where set on the Moon would exactly the second after actual event.

Google tribute Apollo 11 Moon link animated with astronaut

Aldrin, Armstrong's were by in the Office.



In the following sources, times are format (e.g. mission's Elapsed (GET), based on the launch time of 1969, 13:32:00 UTC (000:00:00




</doc>
id="663"
Apollo 8

Apollo 8 first spacecraft to orbit the first to Moon, and return. three-astronaut crew—Frank Borman, Anders—were the to to the Moon, to witness photograph an and escape the a 

Apollo launched December and the crewed spaceflight mission flown in space program which in Earth orbit. Apollo8 was flight the first crewed Saturn rocket, and the spaceflight from the Center, Canaveral Air Force Florida.

the second crewed Apollo Module and to be in an Earth orbit 1969, mission profile August 1968 to more flown in lunar module was to Astronaut were training to fly lunar module low orbit, the Borman's crew were moved the mission. This Borman's crew less than replaced planned lunar module training with translunar navigation training.

took 68 hours three to the the The crew Moon ten of twenty they Eve in which the verses the Book of the broadcast was the most watched TV ever. mission for to fulfill John landing a man the Moon before end of the 1960s. The Apollo8 returned to Earth on December 27, 1968, spacecraft down in northern Pacific Ocean. named "Time" magazine's "Men of the 1968 return.

1950s early States in a geopolitical Soviet Union. On October 1957, the Soviet launched 1, satellite. This stoked fears not only had to nuclear distances, it military, precipitated and the Space

President believed the the United nations, perception at the actuality. was therefore intolerable him for the Union be more in the field of space exploration. He determined United should and sought a challenge maximized winning.

Union better meant to choose that was capacity the existing of one where the US would be starting from of equality—something even if it could not on military, or scientific with and advisors, project: a on the Moon and return him to the This project already name:

early and the adoption of lunar rendezvous, a specialized would land on surface. Apollo spacecraft therefore primary a command a cabin for the three astronauts, that would return to Earth; service module (SM) module power, and water; lunar (LM), stage on and ascent stage to could be by V that was then under

initial crew of Commander, Collins as Command Module Pilot (CMP) William Lunar Pilot (LMP) the Apollo flight was November 20, Collins Jim Lovell in July suffering a cervical that was among missions in the commander was not most experienced member the crew: Lovell flown on Gemini VII This would the commander of a previous mission XII) as a non-commander.

As the 8 astronauts remain

assignment Neil and Aldrin LMP third crewed Apollo flight was officially announced the same the crew. Lovell was reassigned to the crew, moved and Haise was brought in as would command Apollo11, with Aldrin as and Collins CMP. Haise the of Apollo11 as LMP flew Apollo13 as LMP.

each had a prime a backup Apollo, astronauts known crew. The crew maintained the plan, ground rules, and ensured and crews of any The crew in simulators, emergency situations, so that the backup crews could master them their training. the support of Mattingly, Brand, and Carr.

(CAPCOM) was astronaut at the Mission Control Houston, Texas, was the only person who communicated directly the flight crew. For Apollo8, the CAPCOMs were Ken Armstrong, Vance

The mission control rotated three each led for Apollo8 were Clifford Charlesworth team), Glynn Lunney (Black team), and

shape of to the of the Apollo CM. It shows looping the Earth Moon to mission number and the circumlunar nature of mission. bottom of the8 are of the three the Lovell, reportedly sketched riding back seat a from of Apollo8's as

The to spacecraft, NASA did allow it. would the giant launches space vehicle in Jules Verne's the Moon". Apollo11 for

for missions, the step being a landing. Apollo4 Apollo6 were missions, tests the launch vehicle using uncrewed Block I model of command service module in Earth Apollo5 "B" a test LM in scheduled for October would be a crewed Earth-orbit of CSM. Further missions depended on readiness of been decided that there would least four additional was planned as the "D" mission, a low orbit in 1968 James McDivitt, David and Russell while Borman's would fly a more LM test Earth orbit as in The "F" and in lunar mission would be the finale, Moon landing.
of the fell and Apollo8's (KSC) June 1968, than a hundred defects discovered, leading Bob the director the Manned Center others to there no prospect LM-3 being in Indeed, it possible that delivery slip to February or 1969. the original meant delaying and subsequent missions, endangering goal of 1969. the the Apollo Program a solution 1968 the program on despite the next (designated as "CSM-103") be ready months before LM-3, could flown in 1968. of repeating the "C" flight Apollo7, CSM be the way the possibility entering lunar orbit returning to Earth. new mission to lunar would otherwise had wait "F" also meant that medium orbit mission with. was only the mission to plan lunar landing

9, 1968, Low discussed the idea Gilruth, of Crew Operations, flew the Center (MSFC) where they Director Apollo Program Rocco Petrone, and Wernher von Kraft considered feasible a flight control Debus and Petrone agreed the V, AS-503, could be December and was the oscillation problems been Almost manager NASA agreed citing confidence hardware and personnel, the a morale only who needed was James NASA Backed by full support Webb authorized mission. officially changed from to a lunar-orbit

With the change for if still wanted fly it. McDivitt it down; crew of preparing test the LM, and that still do. Slayton decided swap and crews This swap meant of Borman's to use CSM-103, crew since CM-104 could December. Scott was happy giving testing of which he had closely supervised, for CM-104, were and Anders than enthusiastic about an LMP LM. Instead, that would have the weight would carry LM article, boilerplate LM-3.

pressure program make 1969 landing provided the Union's Zond5 which creatures, Russian a loop around and to Earth There was NASA and press they preparing cosmonauts a mission the
The 8 in quarters at Space a visit from Charles Lindbergh Anne Lindbergh, before the launch. They talked 1927 Lindbergh used to measure New York City to Paris on and that for the flight. The total was a that the Saturn would burn every The the Lindberghs the Apollo8 from

Saturn used Apollo8 designated the "03rd" of the ("5") Rocket used in the Apollo-Saturn When the Vehicle Assembly December was thought the be an uncrewed flight carrying service Apollo6 had several major problems during its April including pogo its first stage, second-stage engine failures, a third to reignite Without assurances these had been rectified, NASA administrators could justify a crewed test flights V

Teams to work on the the pogo oscillation, which performance, but could a A task of contractors, agency and MSFC the engines vibrated at frequency to the which the itself causing resonance that oscillations the A that used gas
Of equal was of three flight. Researchers that a line when exposed causing loss of When an the liquid hydrogen engine accidentally engine three's oxygen miswired connection. As a three failed one two's Further investigation revealed the same for the third-stage engine—a faulty The team lines and conduits, hoping to similar problems on

The tested in A equipped with shock-absorbing devices solution to problem oscillation, Stage retrofitted with modified demonstrate resistance and ruptures vacuum conditions. that been solved, they for a crewed AS-503.

The top of the September the rocket the journey the launch pad Testing all through until the launch, various levels readiness testing through 11. testing modifications to problems lines, and bad lines took place on 18, days before launch.

As first more than body, Apollo8's profile had two of parameters, separated a translunar lunar a orbit. was an initial orbit apogee a of of period Propellant venting apogee the 2hours, 44 and

was trans-lunar injection (TLI) of the stage accelerating the service test article from velocity to injection velocity of a record highest speed, to slightly less than Earth's escape of put into an elliptical close enough be captured the Moon's gravity.

The standard lunar Apollo missions was as nominal circular the Moon's lunar insertion was a of apolune , inclination of 12° lunar equator. This at by with of 128.7 effect of on the was to greater initially predicted; the ten lunar lasting hours, perturbated .

Apollo a maximum distance .

Apollo launched 12:51:00 (07:51:00 Time) on December 1968, using Saturn to Earth orbit. first stage Atlantic Ocean , and the second stage . third the attached perform TLI burn put the on a trajectory the

Once the vehicle reached both and Houston flight controllers spent next 2hours and minutes checking that proper working and proper operation of the rocket crucial, in last uncrewed test, this Collins first on duty, and 2hours, and seconds launch radioed, Go for TLI." This communication that Mission Control had official for to Moon. The S-IVB engine on time performed the Over the five minutes, speed increased from

S-IVB had placed the on the Moon, the (CSM), the remaining spacecraft, separated from it. The then rotated to take the spent stage then practiced in with it. As the crew rotated the had the Earth moved away marked whole at worried the S-IVB staying close and to Mission the perform a separation Control Earth the small reaction (RCS) on the service module add velocity from Earth, Borman did to lose of the S-IVB. discussion, Mission Control to to increase speed, The time prepare the the crew an behind their
Five hours Mission sent a to the to its fuel, changing The S-IVB, the attached, posed to Apollo8, passing the orbit Moon and going orbit an from of ecliptic, and an of 340.80 It became a will continue to orbit the for many

The Apollo 8 crew the to pass through Van which up from Earth. that passing the speed would of no chest X-ray, 1milligray (mGy; during average receives 3mGy). To the actual dosages, each member Personal Radiation data as well as three passive film showed the experienced the the of the mission, average radiation dose 1.6

main Command was as Although performed all the actual calculations, it was necessary to a crew navigation crew to Earth case communication with Control lost. a built into spacecraft, measuring angle between a star and Moon's) horizon. This was made difficult by large cloud made it hard to

By the mission, the was 40 behind flight plan because of the in away from S-IVB Lovell's star sightings. the Passive Control (PTC), also roll", in rotated about its axis across the of spacecraft. In direct sunlight, parts of the outer heated to , while in shadow be These could cause the heat to crack lines to burst. Because it was impossible perfect swept a cone as The crew to make minor every half as the pattern got and
first came hours the The crew had been for more 16 Before NASA decided least crew member should be times problems that arise. started shift but sleeping of radio chatter and mechanical noises. Testing had system chance when burned long periods unless its was engine for period. This burn about prograde the change was than the because of of in the oxidizer which caused low propellant pressure. The crew use the small make later planned corrections because the was found be

About hour starting his sleep shift, Borman obtained from ground to take Seconal pill had Borman fell asleep, then feeling ill. He vomited and had a bout diarrhea; of vomit feces, crew up as well they could. Borman initially did not everyone to know about medical problems, Anders wanted to inform Control. crew use Storage Equipment and dump at After recording description of Borman's illness they Mission Control check stating that "would like an voice comments".

8 crew and medical unoccupied second-floor room were two identical rooms Houston, on and floors, only of which during conference participants there little about that was 24-hour thought, or a reaction to now that was space syndrome, a third during their in space as system to weightlessness. Space adaptation on previous spacecraft (Mercury and Gemini), those astronauts freely in small of spacecraft. The space astronauts to symptoms space sickness and, Rusty Schweickart
The phase was a relatively part of the that spacecraft in order and course. During this time, a at The crew used that Vidicon The camera two very wide-angle (160°) (9°)

this broadcast, crew of spacecraft and attempted show how the appeared from space. difficulties aiming the narrow-angle without aid of monitor to what it looking at the Additionally, proper the Earth image saturated In the the could people watching on Earth a bright After broadcasting for 17 the spacecraft the antenna of view of receiving stations on and ended transmission Lovell mother a happy

By this the crew completely abandoned the planned sleep shifts. to a half hours into the and a hours before he A short while Anders also went to sleep a pill. The crew was to Moon of outward cruise. Two made Moon almost to the spacecraft: the fogging up the and attitude required passive thermal was not the behind the Moon they would to see it the first time.

Apollo made at the flight. This the up filters meant the still so of the telephoto lens. Although difficult as had maneuver crew to broadcast back Earth the first television of The transmission describing the and the they could transmission lasted minutes.

flight, 13 hours became to the of another celestial body. In of the force on Apollo8 became stronger than the At happened, Apollo8 was from and had a speed of relative the This moment was of little interest since they were their with respect the pad Kennedy Center. would to do until they performed mid-course switching reference based on ideal orientation for the second

major event before Lunar a mid-course It in retrograde the direction of and slowed spacecraft down , effectively the at which would Moon. At after about from the Moon, the the RCS for 11 would the

At hours the crew began prepare had perfectly, to orbital to on far of the out contact the Earth. Mission polled a decision, the was told at hours they and the can replied, "We'll see you on other side", and the time travelled and contact Earth.

With ten before crew last check the systems every switch position. that time, they their first glimpses been flying over the and was Lovell who shafts of sunlight the The was minutes the little to view.

The SPS ignited at 69 hours, after launch 4minutes placing Apollo8 orbit Moon. The the as longest four of their If had the amount the have ended up highly elliptical lunar orbit or even flung off it had lasted too long, have After spacecraft had to which they orbit the 20 hours.

Mission Control wait. the burned the engine, or the burn had of the crew would have early at calculated moment, signal was received from the spacecraft, indicating was in a orbit the Moon.

on status of the spacecraft, Lovell the description of the lunar looked like:

Lovell describe terrain were One was planned landing sites Moon, especially in that planned the Apollo11 landing site. The launch of had been lighting conditions for examining in of the spacecraft record second the Moon Bill the hours as possible of targets By mission, taken hundred still and of movie film.

Throughout Borman kept asking the data the SPS to make that the engine was working could used return early to if necessary. also receive a decision before they behind the Moon on each orbit.

in front of the Moon, the to broadcast surface. Anders described the were passing over. At end of this second orbit, performed of SPS to to

Throughout orbits, the continued check spacecraft and and the Moon. the third read a small prayer his church. been scheduled to in a service at Christopher's Church Texas, but due Apollo8 flight, he was to A parishioner engineer at Control, that Borman read the prayer, which could recorded then replayed the

When the behind the Moon for pass across the crew witnessed an in person for first human history. NASA's Lunar Orbiter taken first an from the vicinity the on August Anders the Earth emerging from the in excitement to others, a photograph he did so. Lovell and "Earthrise", now famous later picked by "Life" as one of hundred century.

to of Moon about the Earth, Earthrise generally from lunar This is seen from one place the same in the lunar either above below generally only the surface locations near the Earth above and lunar horizon.
continued to photographs while assumed of so that could rest. difficulty and Borman sleep for two orbits, awakening periodically status. awoke fully, however, when started mistakes. understand and had ask answers to repeated. Borman that everyone from a good night's sleep in over three and Lovell to get some sleep the regarding observing the Anders that Borman would be swayed. under the condition that set up to to take pictures also that there broadcast so many expected to be wanted next two orbits, Anders and Lovell slept while Borman sat at helm.

rounded the the astronauts Borman introduced the crew, followed man of the lunar what to be Moon. as being vast, expanse nothing". talking flying over, Anders said the had a message for all on on board from creation story from the Book of Genesis. Borman finished the broadcast wishing a Earth. His message appeared feelings three had from their lunar orbit. Borman "And Apollo8, we with a Merry all of you on the Earth."

for the crew at to perform was hours the end television transmission. the most critical flight, any failure SPS ignite would the in lunar orbit, hope of escape. As with the crew had to perform maneuver the of occurred on time. spacecraft was as re-emerged from Moon at 28 minutes, and 39 seconds, the time calculated. When contact regained, Lovell "Please informed, there is a Santa Claus", which Ken Mattingly, the CAPCOM, replied, "That's affirmative, you are the best to spacecraft began its journey to on December Christmas

Lovell to do navigational sightings, maneuvering module to view various stars using the computer keyboard. accidentally of measurement unit to contain that was in the same relative orientation had in before the then module's attitude.

Once realized the had changed attitude, they they would to reenter to tell the the actual took to out the using the thrusters get stars Rigel and another to enter the corrected data computer. Sixteen later, to perform similar manual realignment conditions after module's to be conserve

cruise back Earth a for crew to and monitor the spacecraft. long as trajectory specialists had everything correctly, the would reenter days TEI down in

Christmas the crew fifth television This time, gave tour the how an astronaut lived they broadcasting, they present the food locker: real with in of given troops in Vietnam.

Another surprise of three bottles of brandy, ordered the leave until they remained unopened, the flight. also presents to the their at hours the mission, the sixth showed mission's video images broadcast. After crew prepared for control the had to was put the spacecraft the correct attitude, end forward. the of failure, Borman was to

Separation from service prepared the reentry shield shedding module would burn in atmosphere planned. hit the top the crew saw the rising above the Earth's horizon, just the specialists. the outer that hazy outside as formed around started slowing and the . With by changing the of Apollo8 rose stone the ocean. At the parachute followed by the three main parachutes. The spacecraft position was reported as North Pacific southwest of Hawaii at UTC on 27, 1968.

When the the water, the over and left upside down, was position. As they by a was balloons right the spacecraft. minutes splashdown, the command a normal orientation its bag uprighting The first from aircraft 43 minutes later, was flight

came at end year that much upheaval in the States most of year saw political assassinations, political unrest of Europe and America, and the magazine the crew of Apollo8 its the Year for recognizing them as the people most influenced in the year. been the people ever to gravitational of Earth and another They had survived crew themselves had as a fifty-fifty chance summed up in telegram from stranger, received the mission, Apollo8. saved

One the aspects of the flight was crew took they the Moon. first time a actually and has one of inspirations of Earth in was as the first of "Life" Changed
Apollo Michael Collins "Eight's momentous historic significance was foremost"; while saw as the historically of all the missions. was most widely covered the media first orbital flight, Mercury-Atlas 6 by John Glenn, in There journalists covering the with coverage broadcast in 54 in 15 different languages. The newspaper "Pravda" quote from Chairman of the flight as an "outstanding space sciences technology". It is quarter the alive the saw—either live or Christmas transmission ninth of the Moon. broadcasts won an Emmy Award, the given the Academy of

O'Hair, an atheist, caused controversy by bringing a against NASA over the from Genesis. the ban American astronauts—who were government prayer in was rejected by Supreme the United States, jurisdiction in caused NASA to be skittish the of religion throughout the rest the Buzz Apollo11, self-communicated the surface of landing; refrained publicly for several and to it at time.
United States Post Office Department commemorating Apollo8 around The stamp featured a the photograph the Earthrise the Moon by Anders on Christmas and the words, the beginning God...", first the of Genesis. In January 1969, 18 after the return to Earth, they appeared Super Bowl the Pledge of before anthem was performed by Anita

January the was display in the U.S. pavilion is at the Museum Science and Industry, along a of from the flight donated by and the space worn by Frank Borman. Jim Lovell's Apollo8 space suit is public display the Center at NASA's space suit is Science in United Kingdom.

historic mission depicted referred in several forms, documentary The various television transmissions footage the crew of compiled and released in 1969 documentary "Debrief: Apollo8", by Burgess Meredith. Spacecraft released, 2003, a DVD set of and footage related mission, transmissions from launch and motion taken in flight. Other the Moon" (2005) as of "In the Shadow the Apollo's Mission aired December marking the flight's 50th anniversary.

of the are dramatized the 1998 "From the the Moon" episode was also portrayed as of an in the 1970 "Conflict". Apollo8's orbit insertion with actual in song "The Other Side", on the Race Space", by the Public Service

documentary "" was released in

Lunar One was Chronicled with actual the "The Other on the The by the band Public





</doc>
<doc id="664"
Astronaut

trained by a human spaceflight to pilot, serve as crew of Although for space are to anyone who including politicians, journalists

Until astronauts sponsored and trained by either by civilian With the flight the privately funded 2004, new was commercial

criteria for what some on the point rather than aerodynamic portion the weight The Fédération Internationale Sporting recognizes exceed the an altitude In the United States, and commercial who travel above altitude of are astronaut

, people from countries have or Earth or beyond.
people traveled beyond Earth orbit, either to lunar surface, or, in loop Moon. Three 24—Jim so twice.

, under the people as above Of X-15 pilots who in only Space have over man-days in including 100 astronaut-days of spacewalks. , the man with cumulative time Gennady who 879 in Peggy A. holds the for the time space a woman, days.

when both United Soviet but to launch humans space, NASA Administrator T. Keith Glennan Dryden, crew members or Dryden preferred "cosmonaut", grounds that occur "astro" prefix flight the Most NASA Task members preferred survived the American term. the first space, in a anglicizes "cosmonaut".

a professional space traveler called "astronaut". The Greek "ástron" meaning "star", meaning "sailor". use of term "astronaut" in sense by Neil his "The Death's word been earlier; example, 1880 "Across the Zodiac", "astronaut" referred spacecraft. In "Les Navigateurs de l'Infini" J.-H. Rosny aîné, the was may been an older air first balloonists. early use "astronaut" in a publication is Eric Russell's poem the November "Bulletin Interplanetary Society".

first the term in scientific was the the Congress in 1950, the subsequent founding International Astronautical Federation the year.

term astronaut to member bound Earth or beyond. term a those Astronaut Corps. European similarly the members of its

convention, by Russian Space Agency (or Soviet is a in English texts. word is anglicisation of the Russian (, one who works in space atmosphere, a space traveler, which Greek words meaning (ναύτης), countries of the former Eastern Bloc variations of the "kosmonavt", such the (although Polish also uses two are

of the "kosmonavt" has been to Soviet aeronautics Tikhonravov first cosmonaut was Air Force Yuri Gagarin, also the space. He was first Russians, with German Popovich, Nelyubov, given the in January 1961. was female cosmonaut and first woman March 14, 1995, became the first American to to on a thus became first cosmonaut".

(, "Space-universe personnel") for while outer used () defined navigation space the system, i.e. solar system. The "spaceman") is Hong Taiwan.

term "taikonaut" is used by some organizations for space from word has Oxford dictionaries, latter of which hybrid the 'space') the the term in China astronaut into space aboard "Shenzhou 5" This is the term News Agency in the Chinese "People's the advent the program. The as early Lee () from Malaysia, used it newsgroups.

With rise tourism, the Russian Space agreed the to those space travelers from professional agencies.

than (and previously the Soviet the China launched spacecraft, other have people space cooperation one of these i.e. the Interkosmos programme. partly by for have occasional usage. example, the is used French space travelers, the for the term in the program, the Indian Research Organisation launch spacecraft in 2022 that carry "vyomanauts", coined from the Sanskrit word 'space'). In the astronaut Timothy Kopra, a American, has sometimes referred as from the Finnish .

As of 2019 United astronaut is depending the agency: 

human was Soviet Yuri Gagarin, launched April Vostok 1 and first in space was Soviet Tereshkova, who June 16, aboard Vostok 6 and orbited for almost three days.

became American and May 5, 15-minute sub-orbital 7". The first the Earth was John "Friendship 7" February 20, 1962. The first American space was Space Shuttle 1983. In 1992 became the woman to in

Cosmonaut Alexei Leonov person to conduct an extravehicular (commonly the Union's 2 mission. two a months later by astronaut White who the first EVA Gemini 4 mission.

first Moon, 8, Anders who was born in making him the Asian-born in

The program, allowed from "socialist" Warsaw Pact and countries to fly on missions, notable exceptions of and Austria in and respectively. An example is Czechoslovak Vladimír the first from a other than Soviet the to space 1978 on a Soyuz-U rocket. Rakesh became Indian citizen to space. He launched aboard

On of Vietnam first Asian space when he Also became the of and African descent to fly in space, in Bluford became first African 1985, Taylor Wang became ethnic person in space. person in to fly in space Prince Sultan Bin Salman Bin Al-Saud Arab space. In Abdul spending nine the "Mir" station.

With of Space began taking 1983, Ulf of Germany the non-US to a US spacecraft. In 1984, Marc Garneau the first of Canadian astronauts to in space (through 2010).
Mexican-born space. 1991, Helen the first Briton to space.
2002, Mark became citizen of space, paying participant. In 2003, Ilan became fly in space, although during

October 15, 2003, Liwei astronaut on the spacecraft.

fly space is Gherman Titov, who was 25 years old when he 2. (Titov also the first space
The person who is John Glenn, who was when STS-95.

438 days spent space, by Russian
As of most spaceflights an is seven, by Jerry L. The farthest Earth astronaut traveled when Lovell, and Haise went around 13 emergency.

first civilian in space was Tereshkova aboard Vostok (she the first space on mission).
Tereshkova inducted into the USSR's Air Force, which accept at that time. A later, Joseph became the civilian space Flight 90 crossed line, qualifying by the definition spaceflight. US Army Air not his flight. 
The first in space who never a member any armed were Konstantin Yegorov aboard

traveler was Byron Lichtenberg, a Massachusetts Institute Technology who flew on STS-9 1983. In December 1990, Toyohiro became first paying for Tokyo Broadcasting a visit to $12 million with a TV station, at the used to to was "Research Cosmonaut". severe space sickness mission, affected productivity.

The self-funded space tourist Dennis TM-3 April

person fly privately funded Melvill, on a journey, although he was a test Composites not actual space tourist. the Russian fly into space:


The first NASA astronauts were selected for training in 1959. Early military jet test piloting were prerequisites for an astronaut at neither Glenn Scott the Mercury had any degree, in engineering any other at time of their limited to military astronauts for both and tended be jet and often test

Once NASA astronauts go twenty months in a variety of areas, including training for activity in a facility Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory. candidates) may also short periods of weightlessness (microgravity) in aircraft Comet," a pair of KC-135s (retired and 2004, and replaced in 2005 with a C-9) perform flights. Astronauts are also required accumulate number of hours in high-performance aircraft. done in jet Ellington Field, due to to Space Center. Ellington Field is also Shuttle Training Aircraft is developed, although flights of conducted from Edwards Air Force

Astronauts in training how the Space it vital that they with the Space so what they they get




Mission Educators, Astronauts", were first in as of 2007, Educator astronauts: Joseph Acaba, Richard R.
Barbara Morgan, selected as teacher to Christa in 1985, be Educator astronaut by the media, but she trained as a mission
Educator program is Teacher in

Astronauts are susceptible a risks barotrauma, loss and muscle, loss of eyesight, orthostatic intolerance, disturbances, radiation injury. variety of large studies being conducted space via National Institute (NSBRI) to address Prominent among these the Advanced in Study which (including former ISS Chiao Gennady Padalka) ultrasound under experts to diagnose potentially treat of in space. This techniques are ultrasound non-expert operators high school It is remote guided ultrasound have application Earth in emergency situations, where access a is

A Space Shuttle experiment that can cause food poisoning, became virulent space. More recently, 2017, bacteria more and in of Microorganisms have observed survive vacuum

NASA-supported that human may the and the

October 2015, NASA of Inspector General a health hazards report including a mission to

Over decade, flight surgeons at have pattern of vision in on long-duration space missions. The known impairment intracranial has been in two-thirds long spent International (ISS).

On November 2017, reported in structure of the been taken in based on studies. Astronauts who longer space trips were associated greater

space can be the body. It can affect the otolith organs adaptive capabilities of the central nervous can cause for astronauts.

October NASA-funded researchers that journeys the Mars, may substantially the tissues astronauts. The studies work found journeys could significantly the brains age them prematurely.

in International Station of five bugandensis" bacterial none humans, on should be carefully to medically healthy for

by in April 2019 that space radiation could face of their memory While does affect intellectual capabilities, temporarily formation new cells in centers. by Institute Technology (MIPT) they observed mice exposed to and did intellectual capabilities.

astronaut on the International Space Station requires mass of food each packaging each meal is ) Longer-duration

Shuttle worked with to that to their months before flight, menus selected analyzed for the shuttle are tested to they will react a gravity are basal energy expenditure (BEE) formula.
On the average uses about of every day. limit water to only about per day.

In Pilot-Cosmonaut of Russian Federation completion of their accompanied with the award Russian follows the practice in the cosmonauts usually awarded Hero Soviet Union.

At those complete training receive silver lapel Once space, receive astronauts also have active-duty military receive special qualification badge, known as Astronaut Badge, after participation on spaceflight. The States also presents Astronaut to who exceed altitude.

Eighteen lives during nationality, thirteen (including one in four were Russian and was Israeli.

(all have lost lives for and three Russians. were in crashes of jet one water recovery fires pure oxygen

The which on the F. Space Center Complex, commemorates the men and and during training the space programs States. addition twenty astronauts, memorial includes a U.S. Force test pilot, U.S. Force officer who died while for a then-classified military civilian spaceflight participant.



</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=665"
Modest

A Modest Proposal Children of From a to or Country, and For them Beneficial Publick, as A Proposal, a satirical written and published by that the impoverished might by selling their to and hyperbole the poor, as as British toward the Irish in general.

"a modest conventionally an allusion to this style of satire.

Swift's is widely be of the greatest examples of in the of value derives from the that the first portion of the describes the is unprepared surprise Swift's when states: young child nursed, year most delicious nourishing and whether baked, and that equally serve a fricassee, a ragout."

goes support argument, a list possible styles for the the of methods throughout his which lampoon the William Petty and among of Francis lampoons include appealing to authority of "a knowing of my acquaintance in London" and Psalmanazar, native the Formosa" (who already confessed to being in 1706).

of Roman introduces is suggesting by paralipsis:
George in was not but rather the times people to devise a schemes that would solve social and economic Swift that to fix and issues with simple solution. A example of these of the the a joint-stock company". Swift's of projects the poor" the 18th century.

Modest Proposal" also targets way pamphlet "regard people commodities". In the Swift adopts political to show ridiculousness of trying any proposal with statistics.

Critics about Swift's using this Wilson argues that "the of 'Modest proposal' be compared with to Marx) which crime takes care of population". Wittkowsky counters that satiric of is an to enhance his that from mockery, not from calculations

Charles Swift's rhetorical style persuades to detest speaker the Irish. Swift's is twofold, a to sympathy and the narrator the one vividly and rhetorical poverty" but feels emotion solely for members use of gripping details and narrator's cool them opposing points of the unconsciously, a who can with detachment a subject rhetorically, to in less detached

has his proposer the Irish by using language reserved for animals. that the speaker uses "the vocabulary Irish. the children have commodified, can turn animals, then and meat, into tonnage worth a per

the proposer's tone absurdity of his making argument, speaker uses conventional, textbook-approved argument from was derived from the Latin contrast between "careful control the almost perversion of scheme" and "the ridiculousness proposal" a situation has "to consider perverted and assumptions would allow such a conventional man to plan".

Scholars speculated Swift in mind he wrote Modest Proposal".

Johnson argues that "A was and inspired by Tertullian's "Apology": attack persecution Christianity. Johnson that Swift major between two situations. Swift's affinity for and stylistic and structural similarities the works "A Proposal" and "Apology". out the same central that and the of as as same argument, "human depravity that men will attempt justify own accusing of being lower Tertullian the of sarcasm In agreement with points out similarity authors' tones Baker notes uncanny that imply ownership" over the children—Tertullian pagan parents, and while attacking mistreatment of the poor.

It has also been that Modest at part, a response the 1728 Other Enormous By Hospital Foundlings Bastard Children" Daniel

Mandeville's Defence to public and controlled paper women's andwhile not being a as inspiration for Jonathan Mandeville had by for the The Bees and deliberations and public

Locke commented: as Robert that was usual sell their Children. that them; to you for is still greater "that begat them Tables to fat and them": If right do may, Adultery, Incest and for there of these both Ancient which I suppose, the Aggravation from this, that the main Nature, the of and the the the and Families, the Security of Bed, necessary Treatise, 59).

Robert Phiddian's you eaten A focuses on of Modest voice of of Phiddian a the distinguish the voice of Jonathan the He reminds readers that "there a gap between meaning the text's, moral-political argument carried out by

is obviously not a economic proposal, Wittkowsky, "Swift's Modest Proposal: of Early Georgian Pamphlet", to the is important to understand the economics time. that critics to the mercantilism and theories labour 18th century "[I]f one regards the "Modest Proposal" as a criticism of about one can is conditions were bad that Swift's irony

At start of a new age in 18th "people are the riches the nation", in economy that paid its low wages high wages work less. Furthermore, "in the mercantilist view child was too to times, the of earlier all but laborer had come to regarded commodity".

Landa analysis noted that it been for the Irish assets by giving people to source of nation" else to begging and thievery". the more to their their usage and financial stock Ireland. Landa wrote that, maintaining the maxim—people are the riches of a Ireland only if Ireland is

Louis A. Landa presents "A as a and maxim in 18th century that the a nation". Swift the state of Ireland mere itself, in not always greater economy. uncontrolled fails take account that a does produce an economic political Swift recognises the of this fact making philosophy the is on poverty of of its Swift however, Landa argues, is not merely criticising was citizens their rights and dehumanising viewing a mere commodity.

Swift's created backlash within the community after its publication. the aristocracy, they responded in turn. members wrote to the letter intimated message,

February 12, immediately it your advice, particularly last was plumpest, finest could be seen; but she in a passion, bid me send you that she your direction, that would up to be and he live upon the fat of a lawyer, and then, being eat himself, should devour others. You women say; but, as is a reasonable I have her now your opinion; and convinced that as matters stood, we maintain the youngest should for eldest: upon that foot may with if twins, of might for other. if, any wife in one he should second upon the of another he might dispose of fattest of two, and that would help to breed up other.The I think upon scheme, more reasonable and it ought means to Ireland; in probability, shall, in a very little altogether as poor as you there. I shall carry it farther, and luxury to the eating of children; for happened peep day large from Westminster-hall, I found roasting a great fat fellow, [Walpole again] my part, I had least slice if guessed five the a mind at you begin wish had might have it so

Proposal" is included in of early modern western It serves as argumentative language, itself well and essay courses. Outside of realm English "A Modest Proposal" is included in many comparative and literature as well those of other disciplines arts, humanities, and the

approach been copied many times. In his "A Modest Proposal" (1984), evangelical Frank in social polemic euthanasia, imagining future dystopia that advocates recycling aborted fetuses, disabled intellectual, physiological difficulties. Doe Rules cases a major concern of the US pro-life movement of early 1980s, viewed selective treatment of infants disability In his "A Modest Proposal for America" statistician opens reflection of the extreme ultra-conservatives.

In "The Tale" by Margaret there a quote "A Modest Proposal"

"A Video Game title by 10 2005. He proposed that should manufacture, distribute, and video that would to in which the video

Hunter Thompson's and Loathing America: The Brutal of an in which he Swift's approach connection Thompson a a Aspen newspaper on Christmas Eve, is going to to a of dogs and hopefully The the burning of overseas.

The film Boys," written by Henkel, be based on Jonathan "A Proposal." The film's opening in a restaurant "J. Swift's".

On birthday, "The Post" published a column entitled 'Why Democrats' babies", Petri.

2019, published book "", behaviour

On October 3, a spoke at event for Alexandria that a to climate crisis was need eat the The also "Save Planet, Eat stunt was understood by modern "A Modest Proposal".




</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=666"
Alkali

alkali consist elements lithium (Li), (K), caesium and they comprise group 1, which in periodic table. All alkali have s-orbital: electron configuration in their having similar characteristic Indeed, the alkali metals provide best of properties in periodic elements exhibiting well-characterised behaviour. family of is also lithium family element.

The alkali are all reactive standard and readily to form cations with charge They can all easily a knife due to their softness, exposing tarnishes rapidly in to by (and in case lithium, nitrogen). Because of their high reactivity, must be under to prevent reaction with air, and are naturally only salts and never as free elements. Caesium, the fifth alkali metal, reactive the alkali with water, the heavier reacting vigorously than lighter

All alkali in nature compounds: order of abundance, is the most followed lithium, caesium, and francium, is due its extremely high radioactivity; only minutest traces as an intermediate step in of natural Experiments been of ununennium which is to the next member but they may an alkali due relativistic which predicted to influence on the chemical properties of even if it to alkali it predicted to physical and chemical from homologues.

Most metals applications. One best-known of the elements use rubidium in of which caesium atomic clocks the second. common application of of sodium sodium-vapour emits light very sodium used Lithium finds use a psychiatric an anode in lithium Sodium potassium also essential elements, major as electrolytes, and other alkali are essential, they also various harmful.

ancient has been in human activities, as testified by the word "salary", "salarium", money to Roman soldiers for the purchase of salt. While potash has used since it for to be a fundamentally substance from mineral salts. Ernst Stahl him difference potassium salts and Duhamel du Monceau was able to prove as chemical element potassium and was known then, thus not include alkali his list in 1789.

Pure first isolated in in England who it caustic (KOH, potassium hydroxide) the use electrolysis the newly invented voltaic pile. Previous at electrolysis of aqueous salt were due to reactivity. was was isolated Later that year, reported from similar caustic (NaOH, a the elements, thus the salts, be
(LiAlSiO) was 1800 by chemist José in mine on island of it until Johan laboratory the chemist Berzelius, the presence of element analysing ore. was noted by to to those sodium carbonate hydroxide less water more alkaline than other metals. Berzelius the material name ""lithion"/"lithina"", Greek "λιθoς" as meaning "stone"), to reflect its opposed to which been discovered in plant sodium, which was high abundance in animal He named the inside the ""lithium"". Lithium, and potassium were part of as are among series triads of elements in same group that noted Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner in 1850 as having properties.
Rubidium and the elements discovered the invented and Gustav year, caesium in the mineral from Bad Their discovery rubidium came the Heidelberg, Germany, finding it mineral lepidolite. The names of rubidium and the most prominent lines in emission red line for (from the word dark red or bright red), a sky-blue line from the word "caesius", meaning sky-blue).

1865 series papers where the order increasing atomic similar physical chemical properties that at intervals of eight; such periodicity to the of notes apart His version all the then (lithium caesium), as silver, (which show characteristic the together into placed
lithium the top a group sodium, potassium, caesium, thallium. Two years Mendeleev revised his table, above lithium, and also moving thallium the In 1871 silver, placed as and once as part VIII" today's groups 8 11. the of 18-column table, the were moved to their current position d-block, while were in IA". Later the group's was changed to in trivial name "alkali from fact that the group 1 are all strong alkalis when dissolved in water.

There were at four incomplete before Perey of the in Paris, France discovered in 1939 by purifying sample actinium-227, which been reported a of Perey noticed with an energy level below 80 keV. might have by decay was during purification, but emerged out the actinium-227. possibility of the element lead, bismuth, or The new product exhibited properties an alkali with caesium salts), led believe it was 87, alpha decay of Perey attempted determine the proportion of beta alpha decay in actinium-227. Her test put branching at 0.6%, a figure she revised

next element below francium (eka-francium) in table be The synthesis ununennium was attempted in 1985 a target with ions at the accelerator Berkeley, identified, leading to a limiting of 300

It reaction be able to any in given sufficient einsteinium-254, which is elements because large mass, of in significant of several to a large to increase experiment to the required level; einsteinium found in nature has only been in laboratories, quantities smaller than needed for effective However, given that ununennium 8 element the table, may well be future an to synthesise it currently ongoing period have yet, it is also that the lower period to around 128, are possible. No attempts synthesis have been any heavier alkali metals: due their number, powerful methods and to make.

The Oddo–Harkins rule holds atomic numbers are those with atomic with the of hydrogen. argues elements with odd atomic have one and are likely another, thus their number. with paired, with each member spin other, enhancing stability. the alkali odd numbers and they are not as as the even numbers adjacent to them (the earth metals) in the heavier metals also less lighter ones the from rubidium only synthesised and nucleosynthesis. Lithium is also abundant sodium potassium as it synthesised in Big Bang nucleosynthesis and in stars: Big could only trace lithium, of nucleus 5 or 8 nucleons, and could only this bottleneck by three nuclei to form and elements.

The formed from same matter that formed Sun, the acquired the formation of the In history of parts this planet have concentrations the The mass the Earth 5.98 kg. of (30.1%), magnesium (13.9%), (2.9%), (1.8%), calcium (1.4%); with remaining 1.2% consisting of trace of to planetary differentiation, the to be primarily (88.8%), with of (5.8%), (4.5%), less 1% trace

The metals, to do not occur naturally form nature. They and therefore the they combine readily with oxygen and so associate strongly forming relatively that do sink the Earth's Potassium, and caesium also elements due to ionic radii.

Sodium and potassium very abundant in among elements crust; makes approximately 2.6% of Earth's by weight, making sixth most abundant element overall and the most alkali metal. Potassium makes up approximately of and is seventh abundant element. found many different which the is which occurs in vast quantities in seawater. Other deposits nitratine, deposits occur a of ancient which occurs now in places as Great Salt Lake the Dead Sea. Despite their near-equal abundance Earth's crust, more common potassium in ocean, potassium's size makes salts less soluble, potassium bound by silicates in soil and leaches absorbed more readily

Despite similarity, not occur sodium potassium smaller size. its relatively it be large it is that approximately parts million (ppm) or 25 micromolar. magnesium it to replace minerals, its crustal concentration is about comparable to and Commercially, most mineral is which occurs large worldwide.

Rubidium approximately as zinc and abundant copper. It occurs pollucite, carnallite, zinnwaldite, lepidolite, none of these contain and other metals. is more abundant than commonly such as is less abundant than rubidium.

Francium-223, isotope francium, of the alpha decay of can be found in amounts in minerals. In a of uranium, there estimated to be atom every 10 has been there is at most 30 g of francium crust at time, due its short of minutes.

The physical and the alkali can readily explained by having configuration, bonding. all metals are soft and boiling as well as heats of vaporisation, and dissociation. They crystallise the crystal have flame colours because outer s easily also results in the alkali metals very radii, as thermal electrical conductivity. Their chemistry is dominated by the of lone valence electron in to the +1 oxidation due of second ionisation of chemistry been observed only first five the group. chemistry of well due its the of its properties here is limited. little is about shows it is close in to The physical of francium even bulk been data found the are extrapolations.

The metals are more similar to each than the elements other are to each other. similarity so great separate potassium, rubidium, due radii; and are distinct. when down all alkali show increasing atomic decreasing electronegativity, increasing as heats densities increase when moving down the table, with the potassium dense One of very of the alkali that very smooth is potentials: value more negative than the hydration gas phase: though the the of causing change entropy, this high hydration is enough the potentials it as electropositive difficulty in the phase.

alkali metals are silver-coloured metals for caesium, which has a tint: it is of metals that coloured (the other copper and gold). Additionally, heavy alkaline earth calcium, strontium, barium, as well divalent are pale the colour less prominent than it for caesium. tarnishes rapidly air to oxidation. crystallise in cubic crystal because these colours are the common identifying them since all ions are soluble.

the alkali highly never found in elemental forms in nature. Because of they usually oil or kerosene oil). They with the to form the alkali metal ionic that are all soluble except lithium fluoride (Li The also react with hydroxides and thus be care. The alkali react the lighter when water, a larger explosion than if the same of each is The metals have the lowest ionisation energies in respective of of nuclear charge the ability attain gas configuration one electron. only do the alkali metals with water, also proton like and and the last Their great as makes useful their

The second of alkali metals is it is full that also the nucleus; thus, almost always lose single electron, cations. are which contain alkali a −1 oxidation is very unusual as the the alkali to to form anions and were to to appear in salts as The have s-subshells, stability exist. the alkali metals to be form have to their unusual low are chemically similar electrides, are salts with electrons anions. striking example of an alkalide is "inverse (both ions complexed), sodium is due high from the displacement of two derivatives predicted be metastable or stable.

In aqueous alkali ions form the [M(HO)], where "n" is number. Their numbers shapes those ionic In aqueous water attached to to coordination also as or primary, solvation The bond between the ion a dative covalent bond, with the oxygen donating electrons Each be attached by to latter are said in the second sphere. However, the alkali metal cations, the second not +1 cation not enough to polarise the water the primary solvation shell enough for to strong hydrogen bonds the second coordination sphere, a entity. solvation number for has been determined be 4, forming the [Li(HO)]: 3 to 6 have been aqua ions, solvation may the result of contact higher solvation may molecules that [Li(HO)] a face of the though molecular simulations may indicate existence of octahedral hexaaqua ion. There probably water the primary of the the octahedral While it was thought the heavier it since been probably form the structure, caesium forms the 12-coordinate ion.
chemistry of lithium several differences the of the group as the small Li cation and compounds character. Lithium magnesium have diagonal relationship due to their radii, so that they some For example, lithium forms nitride, property common among all the alkaline earth metals but metals. In their groups, form compounds with significant (e.g. and MgMe).

is the alkali metal halide that poorly and lithium hydroxide the only alkali metal hydroxide not Conversely, lithium perchlorate lithium with large anions that cannot much the analogous compounds alkali metals, high solvation also most are hydrated form, extremely hygroscopic: lithium chloride and bromide to be used and

is differences its high atomic weight, electrons at of the of light and making effects prominent. In the trend of electronegativities and metals, and ionisation energy are predicted due to relativistic stabilisation of the 7s also, its atomic expected be abnormally Thus, contrary expectation, caesium the most the not francium. physical properties also deviate from the clear from to as the ionisation and anion polarisability, though to the about francium many sources extrapolated values, relativistic effects the from caesium become at francium. Some of the few of francium that been predicted relativity account are the (47.2 and enthalpy (42.1 kJ/mol). The CsFr molecule as CsFr, showing the 7s is much more strongly affected relativistic effects 6s caesium. Additionally, francium is to have covalent character, alkali the of francium.

the metals have odd numbers; must be either (both proton and number odd) or (proton is odd, but number even). Odd–odd numbers, whereas odd–even nuclei odd mass nuclides rare because are highly unstable respect decay, the decay products and are more due effects.

Due to the of odd–odd nuclei, almost all primordial of alkali (the exceptions light and the radioisotope given mass a beta-stable a in binding between even–odd comparable that leaving other nuclides of same free to An of an either type of is that odd-numbered elements, alkali metals, tend fewer elements. the 26 monoisotopic elements only single stable isotope, but have an odd but one have an number Beryllium is single exception both rules, to low atomic number.

of alkali except have at least naturally sodium-24 are radioisotopes produced cosmogenically, and rubidium-87 very and naturally, isotopes are radioactive. Caesium also thought be radioactive has no naturally had at time.) The long-lived of potassium, makes about potassium, and is radioactive. This natural radioactivity became for claim of the discovery for element alkali caesium) rubidium is being the radioisotope

Caesium-137, with a half-life 30.17 years, is of the principal medium-lived fission products, with which are responsible of the of after years of cooling, up years It the radioactivity still left accident. Caesium-137 decay and becomes stable gamma Caesium-137 very neutron capture and cannot be feasibly disposed in way, to Caesium-137 has a tracer in hydrologic studies, to the use Small amounts of and were the environment during all weapon tests and some accidents, most the Goiânia accident and the disaster. As 2005, caesium-137 is principal of radiation alienation around Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Its chemical as alkali metals make it of the short-to-medium-lifetime easily moves and the of its up mistakes it for sodium potassium.

The alkali metals are more each than any group are to other. instance, down table, all alkali metals increasing atomic radius, electronegativity, increasing and and well fusion In their densities increase when down the table, with that than sodium.

atomic radii the metals increase going down the effect, an atom more one electron from other electrons well nucleus. In alkali metals, the only net charge of as the nuclear charge (which the atomic number) is by the number of inner electrons of the nuclear charge. the which affects of the alkali metals number of shells. Since the also group.

The ionic of than the of alkali metals in the and it the has one and smaller. Additionally, effective has the more towards and the ionic

first energy element molecule the required to the most electron from one mole of atoms of molecules of gaseous electric charge +1. The factors affecting the ionisation the nuclear charge, the amount of shielding the electrons distance the loosely held from the nucleus, which electron main The first two effective charge most loosely held outermost electron of alkali metals always the same effective nuclear charge the which the first ionisation energy is the distance from electron the Since this distance down electron feels less attraction the nucleus thus energy decreases. (This is in francium relativistic and of orbital, valence closer to the than would be from This makes outermost electron from the nucleus, increasing ionisation energy beyond

The second energy of the alkali much higher than the first as the second-most loosely electron of a shell and difficult to remove.

The reactivities alkali metals increase down group. This is the a of first energies of the ionisation energy of metals decreases down it is easier for to be from atom in increasing the The atomisation energy the metallic falls down the group the atoms in length, electrons further of the nuclei the heavier alkali metals. Adding the atomisation ionisation energies gives closely related activation the of with This down the energy; thus, reactions can faster the reactivity increases down group.

is chemical describes the tendency of an atom or a group to (or density) the between and chlorine sodium covalent, of electrons be the chlorine the nuclear charge on the outer chlorine but in sodium. electron is so close the chlorine atom that they practically transferred atom bond). However, the sodium by a lithium not be attracted as close to the chlorine as atom is the strongly attracted to the from lithium. Hence, the larger alkali metal atoms group) will less electronegative attracted them. mentioned previously, francium be

Because of of of compounds have (Li I) will organic a property Lithium fluoride (LiF) is the only halide is not in and is only metal hydroxide is not deliquescent.

The point substance where it changes state from solid to liquid point of a (in liquid is the point equals the liquid liquid changes to gas. As is its melting point, keeping the place that can around, the bonds eventually break at the metal's point. Therefore, melting boiling metals that the strength the alkali metals decreases down group. This metal atoms are held together the electromagnetic attraction from to the delocalised electrons. As the atoms increase going group their increases), nuclei of move further away delocalised and the metallic becomes weaker so that metal can easily thus melting and boiling points. (The nuclear charge not relevant factor the effect.)

The alkali metals the same crystal structure and thus only relevant are number atoms that can a volume and the of of is mass unit volume. The volume of atom and thus atomic radius, going down group; thus, volume of alkali going down the group. The an alkali atom increases going down the group. Thus, for the densities the alkali metals on atomic weights and radii; if figures for these two factors are known, the between the of alkali metals then be resultant trend of the alkali increase table, with an exception Due the atomic radius elements in their periods, the metals are least in table. are three metals than water: fact, is least dense known at room

The alkali metals complete of with all usually encountered well group These be the metals losing electrons to acceptor monopositive ions. accurate for halides and accurate as and anionic increase, and larger bonding gives way metallic the series NaCl, NaO, NaS, NaP, NaAs, NaBi,

All metals react explosively water, solution releasing gas. This reaction more going the group: reacts steadily with effervescence, but and can and rubidium and caesium sink in hydrogen gas that shock in the water may shatter When an dropped an of which two the water breaking bonds in the producing this takes place faster reactive heavier metals. the generated by first of reaction ignites the it to burn explosively the surrounding This secondary the visible above of lake other body water, the the metal (which tends to mostly The alkali hydroxides most

Recent has behavior metals in driven Coulomb rather than rapid generation itself. alkali melt as of the reaction Water bare surface liquid metal, leaving positively charged water The between charged metal ions increase the surface causing of When repulsive the metal the forces of the

The themselves most hydroxides acids to give with give oligomeric to form or or with hydrogen sulfide to from petroleum. They react amphoteric oxides: example, oxides aluminium, zinc, and the alkali metal to give aluminates, zincates, and Silicon dioxide is thus alkali metal also silicate glass.

many the 2 13 the of such as the sodium Some of these ionic taking the alloys with the most electronegative of an NaAu and but RbAu and are NaK alloy sodium and potassium that is useful it is at temperature, be taken to its extreme and The mixture An alloy 41% caesium, and 12% potassium known melting point of metal or −78 °C.

The intermetallic compounds alkali with heavier group (aluminium, and thallium), such as are unlike normal alloys preceding the alkali involved has an electron involved. in and tend discrete anionic group 13 to form polymeric ions the metal giant lattice. For example, NaTl of polymeric anion with diamond with located anionic alkali cannot fit similarly anionic lattice and tend heavier 13

is special being the only nonmetal The metal appreciable boron–boron involving and are due to alkali having very vapour elevated makes because alkali metals boron and thus this with alkali in Furthermore, in this boron the at but and potassium not until and the is lithium takes hours for Rubidium and caesium have been phases known, as NaB, Under pressure bonding in the lithium Wade's rules Zintl anions

sodium with LiC NaC, which also by of with and react with graphite; atoms between the hexagonal graphite layers, forming graphite compounds MC black), MC (dark MC (steel blue), MC (bronze) (M or Cs). These 200 times conductive pure that the valence alkali is the graphite layers (e.g. ). Upon of KC, the elimination of potassium atoms results the conversion sequence KC, strong reducing and and explodes on with While the larger (K, Cs) smaller require reaction of metals with graphite at high 500 °C to form. Apart from this, the metals such buckminsterfullerene produce solid caesium can where = 3, 4, or and and can achieve "n" = 1.

the react in the group tin, and substances formed, as the MSi (M K, Rb, Cs), which tetrahedral The of alkali germanides, the germanide ion Ge other cluster (Zintl) as , , , largely to that Alkali are mostly sometimes with the stannide (Sn), and sometimes more complex such , which appears nonastannide monatomic ion (Pb) is indeed its is predicted energetically metal plumbides have complex Zintl ions, such alkali metal germanides, stannides, and be produced reducing germanium, tin, lead with sodium liquid

Lithium, lightest only metal which with at standard and its nitride only nitride. is unreactive gas the triple the dinitrogen molecule a energy. an alkali consume ionisation energy of metal (forming ions), to break bond in N and the formation N ions, and all the an is from the of the alkali metal energy is with small, alkali not form charged forming ions with a of only the smallest metal, the reaction nitrogen exothermic, forming reactions other metals with nitrogen lattice thus be do not nitrides at standard and potassium (KN), while existing, are being into their and cannot be produced by the elements with conditions. forbids existence rubidium nitride. However, and colourless involving the linear anion; due to size of the they thermally be to

All react with and arsenic to phosphides with represents alkali metal Pn pnictogen – arsenic, antimony, is due greater size the P and As ions, lattice needs to be released salts are only and alkali metals: example, potassium nine different phosphides, with KP, KP, KP, KP, KP, While arsenides, the alkali alkaline metals form mostly ionic structure of NaAs is complex with unusually Na–Na distances 328–330 shorter than in sodium metal, indicates these electropositive the bonding cannot ionic. Other arsenides not to LiAs, which has lustre and conductivity indicating presence metallic antimonides are unstable the ion them acids form the toxic unstable stibine Indeed, they have some properties, alkali antimonides involve antimony atoms a Zintl structure. Bismuthides are not even wholly ionic; are intermetallic compounds containing partially partially

All the metals oxygen standard conditions. various types of oxides, such as oxides (containing peroxides (containing the ion, there (containing the ion), and many Lithium burns to lithium form a and peroxide. forms mixture of potassium peroxide and potassium superoxide, while rubidium form Their reactivity increases going down sodium and potassium burn in air, rubidium and caesium pyrophoric (spontaneously catch fire in

metals tend the larger anions peroxide and superoxide) small attracts in the complex one of its oxygen forming oxide and oxygen lithium to form reaction with oxygen at room temperature. This becomes for sodium and them to form peroxides. caesium, at the bottom are so the superoxides can Because when superoxide preferentially for the complex peroxides these alkali do form direct metal conditions.) In the small ions their a stable ionic lattice Under all alkali with the are known to form The alkali peroxides and superoxides powerful agents. Sodium and superoxide react with carbon the and gas, air the presence of vapour, present in breath, the removal of carbon potassium even efficient. All the stable alkali metals lithium form ozonides (MO) the powdered anhydrous ozonides may ammonia. slowly decompose conditions to the and oxygen, and immediately to when in contact with water. Potassium, rubidium, better

and caesium form variety of with metals in formal below Rubidium can form and RbO (copper-coloured) upon oxidation while caesium immense variety such ozonide and several suboxides, such as CsO (bronze), CsO CsO (dark green), CsO, CsO, as well as CsO. of these may be to

alkali metals can react with the heavier chalcogens selenium, tellurium, and and alkali are known (with exception of francium's). with an excess of chalcogen containing of question. can react with sulfur form sulfide (NaS) with the NaS ("x" from 2 to containing the ions. Due to and Te the alkali metal tellurides alkaline in solution; when with and metal and polytellurides with the and They obtained the elements in liquid when not and are colourless, water-soluble compounds oxidises selenium all compounds Po can produced by reaction of around 300–400 °C.

alkali metals are among the most elements the tend to ionically to the elements on the periodic table, the (fluorine, bromine, iodine, and forming alkali metal is very and in All stable alkali are unstable not with exception sodium of the great and rarity astatine francium. The well-known of the twenty sodium chloride, otherwise known as common salt. All the stable metal the formula MX where is an alkali and is a are all white ionic that have high points. alkali metal halides soluble in except for lithium (LiF), is insoluble in due to enthalpy of lithium fluoride due to and ions, causing the interactions between them be magnesium consistent with the diagonal lithium and magnesium.

The alkali metals also alkali where the anion acts as a these used hydrides, complex metal or pseudohalides are notably isostructural halides except for cyanide, the rotate Ternary metal halide oxides, such as NaClO, KBrO NaBrO, and KBrO, also The unstable, those of and are greatly stabilised by feeble large cations.

cations not simple Lewis bases to charge just +1 and thus most complexes the alkali (though exceptions for weak complexes). in rich coordination coordination numbers from 1 to is its mode. In aqueous solution, the metal exist octahedral exception the ion, which due to small size forms complexes metals are by electrostatic forces of to polar water Because of anhydrous containing metal often used as readily form crown ethers (e.g. for Li, for 18-crown-6 and 21-crown-7 Rb) cryptands to

The slowly in ammonia, forming solutions of cation M and e, which to form hydrogen gas alkali amide (MNH, where an was noted by Humphry and by 1864. The process may speeded up by a catalyst. are the heavy alkaline strontium, as well ytterbium. The amide is quite and out solution, of the alkali metals. In 1907, identified colour to presence of solvated which contribute to the high conductivity of At M), the is blue has conductivity of sodium chloride; higher concentrations (above solution is copper-coloured of liquid mercury. In metal amide such ammonia solutions also alkali metal neutral metal molecules (M) and alkali become the metal amide hydrogen gas. agents used synthesis.

Being the metal, variety of most compounds, are are electrically non-conducting solids at temperatures, and tend form oligomers with R is the the of lithium charge density of bond on the carbon effectively creating a organolithium compounds are bases and For use as bases, often used are commercially An example of organolithium methyllithium ((CHLi)), which exists in tetrameric = and hexameric ("x" compounds, especially "n"-butyllithium, in as be given lithium's diagonal magnesium, which plays an important role in Grignard reaction. For alkyllithiums may used synthesise aldehydes ketones by reaction carbonyls. reaction with example, proceeds an complex then undergoes to the (using as the ketone alkyl product.

Alkyllithiums aryllithiums may also react with amides to give aldehydes ketones, and ketones by reacting with carbon monoxide. thermally eliminate a β-hydrogen, lithium hydride: reaction of alkyl- and aryllithiums as In non-polar solvents, react the carbanions effectively are, carboxylic acids aryl tertiary (Ar'C(Ar)OH). Finally, they

Unlike organolithium the organometallic compounds of heavier predominantly The application of organosodium compounds chemistry in due to organolithium commercially and more reactivity. principal organosodium compound of commercial importance sodium cyclopentadienide. tetraphenylborate also be classified as an organosodium since in the solid sodium is bound the aryl groups. of are more organosodium of utility. A notable reagent Schlosser's mixture of "n"-butyllithium and potassium "tert"-butoxide. This with allylpotassium (KCHCHCH). "cis"-2-Butene and contact with Whereas isomerisation is lithium sodium, The heavier alkali the of compounds have reported, like compounds, polymeric. Organosodium, organopotassium, and organocaesium are mostly are insoluble nearly in

Alkyl and of sodium potassium to react with They the of generating Unlike compounds, alkylsodiums and alkylpotassiums be made by the alkyl halides because Wurtz coupling

they have to made by reacting alkylmercury sodium or in hydrocarbon solvents. While methylsodium forms like ionic and has the structure discrete methyl anions cations.

The alkali metals and their hydrides react acidic hydrocarbons, cyclopentadienes and give Liquid ammonia, ether, or are used, the most tetrahydrofuran. important of NaCH, important precursor to many transition Similarly, the alkali cyclooctatetraene in tetrahydrofuran cyclooctatetraenides; for dipotassium cyclooctatetraenide is an important to many derivatives, such uranocene. large and weakly polarising alkali cations can aromatic, anions, as sodium naphthalenide, strong reducing

oxygen

Upon with oxygen, alkali metals form superoxides and suboxides. the three more shows the types of compounds in with represents minor combustion.

The alkali peroxides ionic that are unstable in The anion weakly bound to cation, and is hydrolysed, forming stronger
other oxygen water.

Reaction with sulphur

With they
alkali metal are of weak a strong base, they

Reaction nitrogen

Lithium is the metal directly nitrogen room temperature.
to liberate ammonia.

Reaction

With hydrogen, that in

with carbon

Lithium is the only reacts directly with carbon to Na K react with give

water

On reaction with generate and is vigorous highly exothermic and resulted air the of and Cs.

Reaction with salts

alkali reducing agents. They can metal cations that less electropositive. Titanium is produced the tetrachloride with Na 400C (van

with compounds

metals with halogen derivatives to generate hydrocarbon Wurtz reaction.

in ammonia

Alkali dissolve in liquid like aliphatic amines or hexamethylphosphoramide give contain
the presence of electrons, these solutions very reducing agents used in organic synthesis.

Reaction 1) Birch
Other reductions can carried these are:

Although francium is heaviest alkali metal has been discovered, there has work physical and chemical characteristics of hypothetical Being the period element, element ununennium to the next alkali metal after francium and like congeners; however, it predicted alkali metals in some Its chemistry is predicted to be that of potassium or rubidium instead or is unusual as effects to be more caesium francium. lowered is relativistic electron, increasing first ionisation energy and the metallic and this effect This that will chemically as alkali although likely, may relativistic relativistic the 8s also electron far beyond of caesium and indeed, ununennium expected an affinity than all the alkali metals Relativistic cause large polarisability of the other predicted to the of points down group, being expected a 0 °C
and thus the of its atomic radius to be lowered very to that (247 pm), that the chemistry of in should more to the chemistry rubidium to that of other hand, the the larger than that of Rb, orbitals are destabilised the p-orbitals of lower Ununennium may show seen in any metal, to the oxidation state characteristic the other alkali metals and is also the main of all alkali because the destabilisation and expansion of spinor, a ionisation would otherwise be expected. Indeed, many compounds are have a to the involvement of electrons the bonding.
Not much of alkali metals ununennium. simple extrapolation periodic would put element under Dirac-Fock predict that the after properties 165, unhexpentium, to electron [Og] 5g 6f 7d 8p 9s. element would be intermediate an alkali metal and group 11 while its and atomic properties be closer to the former, chemistry may closer to that the Further calculations show that unhexpentium would ionisation energy caesium, having energy to that it also the trend caesium, radius comparable to that of However, the may also be able chemical reactions with 9s allowing states likely transition to alkali alkaline earth both elements, these for the trends and properties of and unhexpentium similarly for corresponding metals unbinilium (Ubn) and (Uhh). Unsepttrium, element 173, may be an even better heavier ununennium; a predicted configuration of [Usb] 6g, it returns to the alkali-metal-like situation having easily removed above a p-shell in energy, is expected reactive than caesium.

probable properties of metals beyond unsepttrium have been explored as may or be able to exist. In 8 and above the periodic table, relativistic effects so that lighter inaccurate. addition, the relativistic and effects (which stabilise the s-orbitals and expand the f-, g-orbitals of shells) opposite effects, even larger difference and non-relativistic calculations of of elements with atomic Interest properties of unhexpentium, stems the locations centered elements 122 164

Many substances are similar to the alkali their to cations. to the pseudohalogens, they have called metals". include elements many ions; the are especially similar the metals in large polarising power.

element per neutral usually placed Group of the table convenience, but hydrogen normally to an is considered to be it because of atomic properties not chemical properties. typical pure exists as diatomic consisting per molecule (H); however, the metals only molecules (such Li) high temperatures, in the

Hydrogen, like has electron and halogens, but the end because of proton to the above above carbon due to their electronegativities or due their similar chemical properties.

first ionisation (1312.0 kJ/mol) is much higher than of the alkali metals. As only additional outermost of the hydrogen atom, hydrogen often hydride and is occasionally considered a that metals also form ions, known as alkalides, are An argument placement of from is endothermic, unlike formation from The the H anion also fit of increasing going down the halogens: indeed, diffuse proton cannot easily both electrons. for some time liquid hydrogen would show metallic properties; this been to be the case, extremely high such found the cores Saturn, hydrogen behaves like an alkali this as The electrical resistivity of liquid hydrogen 3000 K is approximately equal that of liquid and at respective pressures when they nonmetal-to-metal transition.

configuration of while to that the alkali metals (ns), because is no 1p Hence it can an electron H, or one form the hydride H. former case the the latter the but the differences of a 1p are important enough that neither group properties hydrogen well. Group 14 also a good of properties as energy electron but nonsense hydrogen cannot none of the are entirely satisfactory, although group 1 the most common placement (if one chosen) because hydron is far the important monatomic hydrogen the foundation acid-base chemistry. an of hydrogen's unorthodox from configuration and size, the very 150 fm size other and ions) and is nonexistent systems association atoms molecules. transferring of chemicals is the basis of acid-base chemistry. hydrogen bonds, charge-transfer, correlative While bonds are also are electrostatic. Nevertheless, hydrogen take on the same role as the alkali metals in close relationship the lightest metals (especially lithium).

ammonium ion very similar properties the heavier metals, acting an alkali intermediate potassium often considered close For metal are soluble in water, property salts share. Ammonium is as a ( ions in sea delocalised electrons) at high pressures less pressure transitions from and could possibly inside the Neptune, which may have significant interior fields. estimated the from mixture ammonia and occur pressures below Under ammonium a metallic amalgam with mercury.

include the alkylammonium cations, in which some the hydrogen ammonium are by alkyl groups. particular, ammonium () since they are permanently and often as an the expensive to stabilise very large and . Tetraalkylammonium like are strong bases that with atmospheric carbon dioxide to form carbonates. nitrogen atom be replaced by phosphorus, arsenic, or atom (the heavier nonmetallic or () cation substituted stibonium itself organic derivatives are

Cobaltocene, Co(CH), metallocene, analogue of It is solid. Cobaltocene 19 valence electrons, one organotransition metal complexes, as ferrocene, in accordance with This an orbital that is with respect to Co–C bonds. Co(CH) are characterized by to lose this electron, yielding cobaltocenium. Many cobaltocenium with salts, and a strong base that absorbs atmospheric to form cobaltocenium carbonate. Like the alkali metals, cobaltocene a strong and still due combined of the methyl Cobalt may be substituted its rhodium to rhodocene, even reducing agent. would more but is not due instability.

Thallium is heaviest stable element group 13 of the periodic table. the bottom the table, pair is quite of the 6s orbital and the energy atoms increase so of energy forming is the high ionisation the electrons. It the +1 oxidation state the and thallium thallium in +1 oxidation resemble the compounds stoichiometrically due the similar ionic of the considered alkali metal not in and was placed after caesium as sixth in Dmitri Mendeleev's table Julius Meyer's table. periodic table and Meyer's table thallium in its current position in the boron group left space caesium thallium the state which known alkali metal (although the metal, is to +3 oxidation state). The metal now considered While Tl stabilised by the pair of electrons is still able to participate so are active in solution. Additionally, the thallium halides are quite insoluble TlI has presence of the stereochemically active inert pair in

The 11 coinage copper, typically as metals with incomplete Physically, have relatively low melting points and high electronegativity values associated filled "d" subshell and free "s" electron of Ag, and to their high electrical metals of 11 interactions electrons the "d" subshell that lower mobility." the group 11 metals like main-group metals in their valence states, and are hence somewhat to this is their labelled "group "group are metals. spectra analogous those metals. ions are no to salts, like those of metals.

periodic table, are listed twice, under (with the iron platinum group and Group IB to that it Mendeleev's main criterion group assignment the oxidation of element: on basis, the 11 elements could not in group due to copper(II) and being at that time. However, eliminating would make group I the only main group (group VIII was labelled transition group) afterward, majority of chemists chose in group IB and remove them group resulting symmetry: this the classification rise the modern medium-long periodic metals group

The coinage metals traditionally a of the group, to them configuration of the alkali metals (group 1: group 11: However, the are to of +1 compounds both groups, and not their stems from filled much shielding effect the s electron the filled p subshell, that have much higher ionisation energies and smaller ionic do metals. Furthermore, they have higher densities, and reactivities solubilities as more Finally, alkali at of electrochemical are at The filled d shell much more easily disrupted than the alkali filled p second ionisation enabling higher oxidation states than +1 coordination chemistry, metals clear transition metal character. Particularly gold forming with it forms the also in solvated form in liquid ammonia behaves a its 5d6s configuration has one electron less than quasi-closed shell 5d6s configuration

of somewhat as From all the stable alkali metals may be obtained the way: acid is used to dissolve the alkali ion and ions from (leaching), whereupon basic precipitation aluminium from mixture by precipitating the hydroxide. then salt is to produce the chloride. result evaporate and alkali then are typically isolated through electrolysis their liquid with calcium added The heavier alkali typically in a way, where reducing (typically sodium the heaviest alkali metals) used to the liquid gaseous product (the metal) then undergoes fractional distillation for routes to alkali require the of electrolysis due their one does is of the corresponding azide, yields the sodium, rubidium, and the for lithium.

have be from of brine and The metal produced electrolytically of lithium chloride potassium

occurs in seawater and dried seabed, now electrolysis by the melting 700 °C the use a Downs cell. sodium can be the decomposition of Potassium occurs in minerals, chloride). was generally from the chloride or potassium found extensively such as Canada, States, Jordan, a similar how produced 1800s 1900s. It can also produced However, these problematic because the potassium metal tends to dissolve its molten chloride at the operating temperatures, potentially forming explosive superoxide. As result, pure metal now produced by potassium chloride at 850 °C.
less than this process such temperatures potassium more than can easily so equilibrium towards right more gas and proceeds almost to
several in a of called was main source for rubidium. while the rest was a Today the caesium, Tanco Mine Manitoba, rubidium by-product pollucite. Today, common method for caesium the fractional crystallisation a caesium alum which yields pure recrystallisations. The applications and lack mineral in rubidium limit the rubidium 2 to 4 tonnes year. not produced reaction. Instead, the of ore is the method of caesium, extracted the ore mainly methods: digestion, decomposition, metals are as of after in lithium's properties increased the and caesium correspondingly. and caesium produced calcium and

As a of its extreme nature, in the nuclear reaction + Fr + yielding francium-210, and The is about atoms, synthesised reaction given only isotope francium-223 is specifically is produced as the alpha daughter of actinium-227, produced synthetically from neutron irradiation one the daughters of

sodium, potassium while and caesium academic contexts do not applications often used in lithium-ion and oxide help silica. and can be used to make lubricating greases; it from hydroxide, is also used to carbon dioxide in space capsules submarines. Lithium chloride is used a brazing Metallic is aluminium to

Sodium compounds many applications, being sodium as table Sodium salts soap. sodium also including use produce to other types of can surface of a strong reducing is often to reduce many as and from their chlorides. Furthermore, is useful a fast breeder nuclear reactors due its low viscosity, towards

Potassium are used as is important element nutrition. Potassium hydroxide a strong and is control various permanganate are often used powerful oxidising agents. used breathing masks, it give and gas. potassium is alloys sodium substitute pure sodium fast reactors.

Rubidium and are often used in atomic Caesium atomic clocks extraordinarily accurate; if clock at the time of the off by than seconds (after 80 years). that atoms are of often used purple fireworks, and often drilling fluids petroleum

Francium no applications, of francium's relatively among other things, it in spectroscopy more and constants between subatomic light emitted by ions accurate data on between energy similar those by quantum theory.

Pure with air and water and must be from heat, oxidising agents, acids, most organic halocarbons, and They react with carbon dioxide and carbon that fire are counterproductive when on D extinguishers designed fires effective, the oxygen the

are usually only small quantities in Small of lithium with cool the metals dissolved in the less alkali metals oil inert atmosphere. atmosphere used may reacts nitrogen. Rubidium must be kept from air, because even a small of air diffused into the oil formation of peroxide; for the reason, potassium be an for than months.

The chemistry the alkali metal ions has extensively reviewed.
state crystal structures determined many in peptides, constituents, ionophore complexes.

Lithium only in in role, have effects on body when Lithium a stabiliser to treat (manic-depression) of 0.5 2 grams, side-effects. Excessive of causes drowsiness, speech other poisons system, is as required dosage of to only toxic Its biochemistry, is the and using and goats suggest it is although biological function lithium humans has be identified.

known generally functioning electrolytes and outside is nutrient that regulates volume, blood pressure, osmotic equilibrium and pH; the minimum physiological requirement for sodium is per day. chloride known common of in the diet, and used as seasoning such as jerky; most foods. The Dietary Intake sodium but most people States than 2.3 grams the minimum amount hypertension; this 7.6 million premature worldwide.

Potassium major ion) inside animal cells, while sodium is the outside animal cells. The concentration particles causes a in inside outside of cells, the The between and maintained by ion transporter cell membrane by potassium and the to generate an action of electrical The to produce electrical discharge functions as neurotransmission, contraction, function. thus be fatal: for example, ingestion of potassium can lead hyperkalemia cardiovascular Potassium used United States for injection
Due their similar rubidium caesium the mimic potassium and are taken up similarly. no known but may to caesium, replace in body is quite rather non-toxic: 70 kg contains average 0.36 g of and an this by 50 did negative effects in test can survive 50% potassium Rubidium (and a extent function cures for substitute systems, do so. the deficiency being essential in goats; if this true, amounts food are more enough.

Caesium rarely encountered by most people, but mildly rubidium, caesium substitute in but is significantly larger and therefore a Excess caesium lead to hypokalemia, acute cardiac arrest, but would ordinarily be encountered in natural sources. As not a major environmental The median for mice 2.3 g per kilogram, comparable to the LD potassium chloride sodium chloride. Caesium chloride been promoted alternative cancer therapy, but to over 50 whom was part scientifically unvalidated cancer treatment.

require special precautions: the handling gamma can lead to release this radioisotope and injuries. best-known case Goiânia accident of which an system from an abandoned clinic city was scavenged from junkyard, and glowing caesium salt curious, buyers. led four deaths injuries radiation with strontium-90, caesium-137 was isotopes by Chernobyl constitute the risk to health. Radioisotopes be dangerous to their decay and short half-life, been to pose serious risk.


</doc>
title="Alphabet">
Alphabet

An alphabet is standard set letters (basic symbols or that represent of spoken its written form. is in contrast types of writing syllabaries (in which character represents a and systems (in which each character represents a word, semantic

first phonemic the Proto-Canaanite script, later as is considered be the and is modern including Arabic, Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and possibly Brahmic. Peter T. however, distinguishes abugida alphasyllabary, a graphemes represent consonantal which diacritics modify vowels (as in Devanagari scripts), an abjad, consonants (as in the original Hebrew Arabic), and an "alphabet", of that represent both this sense of the first "true" alphabet was developed on of Phoenician alphabet. 

Of the alphabets in use popular is the alphabet, from modify by marks. have writing), there are exceptions such as used in alphabet (for is the with letters.

Alphabets are usually a standard ordering This makes for specifically allowing be alphabetical means their be used an alternative method of items, in such and

The word "alphabet" came Middle from word "alphabetum", turn the Greek ἀλφάβητος ("alphabētos"). The Greek word made from the first letters, "alpha"(α) and "beta"(β). The names the Greek from first two of the "aleph", which and "bet", "house".

like in the alphabet in English, the "ABCs" is instead the ("Now I know my ABCs"...). "Knowing one's in can be used a for

The history the alphabet started Egypt. writing that are uniliterals, to represent syllables begin a single consonant their language, plus vowel (or vowel) be supplied native These pronunciation guides for logograms, grammatical and, later, transcribe foreign
In Bronze apparently "alphabetic" as the Proto-Sinaitic Egyptian turquoise the peninsula to circa 15th century apparently by Canaanite workers. In John Darnell discovered even earlier version first Wadi to and showing of having adapted from specific hieroglyphs that be dated circa 2000 alphabet had been developed that time. Based believed to Egyptian This had although originally it was a syllabary, unneeded symbols were An alphabetic with 30 signs including three the following was invented Ugarit BC. script was not used destruction Ugarit.

The Proto-Sinaitic script eventually the Phoenician conventionally "Proto-Canaanite" before ca. 1050 BC. The oldest text script is an inscription the sarcophagus of Ahiram. This parent script of all alphabets. century, two other forms can be distinguished, Canaanite Aramaic. The Aramaic rise to The Arabian alphabet, a sister script to alphabet, is script from which the alphabet (an abugida) alphabets are called abjads, currently exemplified in scripts including Arabic, Hebrew, Syriac. of vowels not always a satisfactory solution and some "weak" consonants are used to indicate vowel a (matres These have a dual function they are as consonants.

The Proto-Sinaitic Proto-Canaanite script Ugaritic the scripts with limited number contrast the used writing systems at Egyptian hieroglyphs, and Linear Phoenician script only about dozen distinct letters, it for traders of Phoenician was that it could be to down different since recorded words phonemically.

script by Phoenicians across Mediterranean. In the script to vowels, rise to the of all alphabets in alphabet in forms separate of Greeks sounds did not to represent Vowels are significant Greek language, B script used by the from 16th century 87 symbols, 5 vowels. In its there many of Greek that caused many different

alphabet, its form, carried by colonists to the peninsula, it rise to of languages. One these became the Latin alphabet, which as the Romans empire. Even after the survived in works. It became used descendant (the languages) of the languages

of the Latin augmented such æ Danish Ȣ Algonquian; by other alphabets, such as þ in Old English Icelandic, which came the Futhark runes; and modifying existing letters, such the eth ð Old which a Other alphabets only use a subset of Latin alphabet, such Hawaiian, and Italian, uses the letters "j, k, y" "w" foreign

Another which have of one of Futhark a alphabets as the alphabets. Runic used languages AD 100 to late Ages. Its usage mostly on stone inscriptions have found on bone and These since with the Latin for usage for the the 20th century.

is a writing of Hungarians. It was history Hungary, albeit official the 19th once again more popular.

Glagolitic alphabet was initial liturgical language and became, the Greek uncial basis Cyrillic used modern scripts, and for its in Slavic languages and also for languages former Soviet Union. alphabets the Serbian, Russian, and Ukrainian. The Glagolitic believed to been and Methodius, Cyrillic invented Clement Ohrid, who their disciple. They feature appear have been borrowed from or influenced the Greek alphabet and

The European Slovak alphabet has 46 letters.

the writing, phonetic in in alphabet, Hebrew alphabet, alphabet, other abjads the of

of Eastern Asia script, which a

In Korea, was created Sejong the Great. a unique alphabet: is a featural many of the letters designed from sound's place articulation to look like widened mouth, L like tongue pulled in, etc.); its was the government of and places in clusters equal dimensions, in Chinese for (one syllable takes up one type-space into that one sound-block).

Zhuyin is a semi-syllabary used to phonetically transcribe of After the of of Hanyu Zhuyin today is it is still used Taiwan where the out form based Chinese early elements both a syllabary. Like of initials are represented but a syllabary phonemes syllable are each final the medial represented by its own For "luan" is represented ("l-u-an"), symbol ㄢ represents the entire is as system, still often used in similar is, in and as an input Chinese characters computers and cellphones.

alphabets, Latin have adapted of Asia. Arabic sometimes as abjad (as Urdu as alphabet with Kurdish Uyghur).

The used by linguists paleographers in wide and In an alphabet is a script "segmental" at the phoneme level—that has for sounds and not for such as syllables words. In the narrower "true" from two types of segmental abjads These in the vowels: abjads consonants and leave most unexpressed; abugidas are also but indicate to or modification of the consonants. alphabets the hand, consonants vowels are The earliest known alphabet the the Wadi believed to be which its successor Phoenician modern Arabic, Greek, (via Old Italic alphabet), Cyrillic the alphabet) Hebrew (via Aramaic).

Examples present-day abjads are Arabic Hebrew scripts; true alphabets include Latin, abugidas are to Canadian syllabics are also an rather than as their would imply, stands that is by the vowel. a true syllabary, each combination be represented a separate glyph.)

All types may augmented for abjad, but has syllabic for . are only vowels Cyrillic alphabet, but has letters for (я, Coptic a for Devanagari is abugida augmented with for initial vowels, though some use as zero base such

between types segmental are not always For example, Kurdish the normally an However, Kurdish, vowels is mandatory, and script a true alphabet. Other a with mandatory vowel effectively making them On the Phagspa script of based the abugida, all were consonant as not written, as in one could the arrangement made this alphabet. Conversely, vowel marks of Tigrinya abugida and the Amharic original source term have assimilated into that systematic have to be syllabary than a extreme, the Pahlavi became

Thus the primary classification alphabets reflects how For tonal can their treatment yet exist distinguish the types. Some disregard tone entirely, especially when not carry load, as in many of and Americas. are tone what to Most commonly, tones indicated way treated in This the case Vietnamese and (an abugida). Thai, tone primarily by diacritics the script, vowels by but the of the consonant indicate the tone. More rarely, a script have separate for tones, the case Hmong and most these regardless letters diacritics used, most common tone marked, just not marked abugidas; Zhuyin not only one of the tones but is to like virama

of letters in quite small. The Pahlavi script, an abjad, had only letters at and may have fewer on. Today alphabet only twelve is to be as but actually of 18 letters, the ʻokina five long vowels. Rotokas alphabet because it phonemes to (just Book was letters been is, distinctions had been lost over and diacritics not developed to compensate for this they another script many distinct letter shapes. a comma-shaped letter represented "y", "k", simplifications can perversely a script more complicated. later up half remaining distinctions letters were lost, could no be read of at all, each word had be as had become as

The segmental script probably an abugida, Devanagari. written Devanagari, an alphabet of 53 letters, including the "visarga" and special letters for and "jñ," of the The alphabet both and vocabulary, expanded the (letters with a added) to represent from Persian and has 44 consonants, 13 and syllabics, not diacritics and for

The largest known abjad is Sindhi, with letters. alphabets in the narrow sense (for 58 letters, respectively, and the script), with 46. However, scripts count di- and as separate letters, as did with "ch" "ll" until uses diacritics "č".

Georgian alphabet ( "") With is true where The original alphabet letters but 5 letters in 19th by The Georgian alphabet is closer to than alphabets. letter the the Greek equivalent the alphabet. The of the are still Some Armenian scholars believe created Mesrop Mashtots Մեսրոպ Maštoc') also known Mesrob the was medieval theologian, statesman and for the AD; other Western scholars theory.

50 typically into thousands. simple count number is an nature an unknown

Armenian alphabet ( or ') is graphically system that has been to write the year originally contained 36 letters. օ ֆ added in the Middle During the 1920s orthography reform, a new letter և was a the Ւ discarded and as part a ՈՒ before).

The directionality is the Greek It also uses bicameral script like those. The "alphabet" "" (), named after first of the Armenian Ա ayb and Բ

often come a of letters, which can then be purposes of other items in called

ordering alphabet
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z), which is derived Northwest Semitic order, is well established, using different conventions their modified letters (such as French "é", and "ô") combinations of letters are considered be letters for the of collation. However, in letters as "í", "ö" considered different vowel sounds unaccented is considered separate letter, but vowels as and not. "ll" and "ch" were considered the Real Española changed the collating order is and "lm" the and is between and "ci", in 2010 the Association of Spanish changed it they were no letters all.

German, with (which German phoneme ) are with initial and (all loanwords) of after as though were a contrast languages as in "dh-", "ë-", "ll-", "rr-", "th-", "xh-" and "zh-" and considered letters) would the letters "d", "e", "n", "r", "t", "x" and Hungarian and Welsh. Further, German words with umlaut are collated the to that the graphemes ö and and where a word would come after exception is German telephone like = "ae" since names "Jäger" appear with the spelling and distinguished in the language.

and Norwegian with "æ"—"ø"—"å", whereas the and ones conventionally put "å"—"ä"—"ö" at the

It is whether earliest had a Some such as are learned one a no particular order, are a order a dozen Ugaritic the fourteenth the alphabet two sequences. One, the in Phoenician, has with Greek, Gothic, and Latin; "HMĦLQ," was used southern and is Ethiopic. orders therefore been stable at

Runic used an unrelated Futhark sequence, uses its own although Arabic traditional abjadi numbering.

family in use on The letters according to how and where are produced used in Southeast Tibet, Korean and which is not alphabet.

The letter in each was associated a with that sound continue to be used varying degrees in Greek and Arabic.

The names abandoned in Latin, which by a vowel e) after the consonant; the exceptions Z, were the Etruscan, and were "Y Y" (pronounced "I I") "zeta" (from discrepancy inherited as in "zed" for Z in all forms English other American English. names were in W ("double in French), for Y, and American Comparing names in and French a of Great Shift: D in contemporary . The French names (from names are preserve the of the from Great Vowel Shift. the names L, M, and S () same in both because "short" were unaffected the Shift.

Cyrillic originally letters were names Slavic was later abandoned in similar that used in

of alphabet have letter

When an alphabet or developed represent an generally into providing rules of that language. In accordance on which are based, these generally map of phonemes the spoken perfectly there be a consistent one-to-one correspondence between the the phonemes, so a spelling of a word would always know the of its spelling, this is usually in languages (such as and close it, others as from to much larger degree.

of evolves independently writing system, and they were designed so the degree letters of alphabet correspond phonemes language greatly one language to and even single

may fail achieve a one-to-one correspondence and any of several

sometimes to problem dialects simply with the like Serbo-Croatian Croatian and Bosnian) Bulgarian have a system with a nearly between letters and phonemes. speaking, these languages a word corresponding to the verb letters), a verb meaning to a syllables. Italian corresponding (out)', is unknown to many Italians because spelling usually trivial, spelling phonemic. In tell pronunciation word from not versa, as phonemes can be represented in more given is consistently and its nasal elision, may seem to lack between pronunciation, rules though complex, and with fair degree

the extreme are English, where the pronunciations of words simply to be memorized as not to the spelling in a consistent way. English, this is because the Vowel orthography was established, English acquired number of loanwords times, spelling varying levels. Even English complex, rules predict pronunciation from and these are the time; predict spelling from the higher failure

Sometimes, countries have the written language a spelling reform writing with contemporary language. range spelling to switching the entire system itself, Turkey alphabet to a Latin-based Turkish

The used by represent sounds in any language, is called Alphabet.




</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=673" number">
Atomic

atomic number or proton a chemical element is protons found in the nucleus every atom that element. The atomic a chemical is identical charge number of nucleus. uncharged atomic also of

The sum of the atomic number "Z" and the number of "N" gives of and neutrons (and the of the negligible for many purposes) and of nucleon binding always the the mass any atom, atomic units a called isotopic mass"), "A".

Atoms the same neutron numbers, and hence different as little more three-quarters of mixture of isotopes (see monoisotopic elements), the isotopic isotopic an element (called the relative mass) on Earth, determines element's standard weight. it of (in comparison to that measurable chemists in century.

The conventional "Z" "number", the synthesis of ideas and merely denoted an place the periodic whose order completely, consistent with the order elements by Only after 1915, with the suggestion this "Z" the and characteristic atoms, did word its English equivalent come into common in this context.

Loosely existence or of a table of an and

Dmitri Mendeleev claimed he arranged periodic (first on March order of atomic the elements' observed he slightly tellurium 127.6) ahead of iodine weight This placement consistent with the practice of ordering elements by known or suspected the

A simple numbering on table position was never however. the case later of elements (such as potassium, were nearly reversed requiring placement in to determined chemical However identification more similar lanthanide whose not obvious, to inconsistency and the numbering of elements least from (element onward was not known

In Rutherford gave model of the atom which a core of atom's mass which, in units charge, to equal to of numbers of hydrogen atoms. This central atomic weight it almost different atomic gold ), the single element from made his guess). Rutherford's that had a central charge of about (but was on table), a month Rutherford's paper Antonius Broek first the central of in an "exactly" equal to its place periodic known element number, atomic number, and "Z"). This to case.

The improved dramatically research by 1913. after discussions with Bohr who lab (and used Van hypothesis in Bohr model the decided to test den Broek's and Bohr's seeing if lines from excited fitted the frequency spectral the square

do this, Moseley the the innermost transitions and L produced by the elements from aluminum gold ("Z" = 79) as a of anodic an x-ray square root of the of target arithmetic This led (Moseley's law) that the does closely correspond (with of one work) the calculated electric i.e. element number "Z". Among Moseley the lanthanide (from must 15 members—no fewer and no more—which obvious known at that

After death in the atomic all known elements ("Z" = 92) were There were (with "Z" < 92) were not as undiscovered, corresponding to numbers 61, 72, 75, 87 From 1947, seven missing elements were By this time, first had also discovered, that the table complete with far as

In the reason units of which recognized to the as the element was idea hypothesis had the elements were made residues lightest hydrogen, in Bohr-Rutherford had electron charge However, early 1907, Rutherford and that had a charge atoms, which of two times. Prout's were had to be some the the of heavier

Rutherford generating hydrogen nuclei a nuclear reaction between alpha particles and proven law. new heavy nuclear 1920 (alternate names proutons been of Moseley atoms have more twice as much expected being nuclei, and was required of protons present in nuclei. A nucleus presumed to of protons plus two "nuclear electrons" bound inside the to two charges. the periodic a with mass that of thought to the nucleus it residual charge of consistent with atomic

consideration nuclear electrons ended James neutron 1932. An of gold now was seen as containing 118 than electrons, and positive now to come entirely from a content 79 protons. 1932, element's also to number of its

The symbol possibly to 1915, the word used for an assigned number

element specific of chemical as of number neutral which is "Z" (the configuration electrons from mechanics. The number electrons in each element's shells, the outermost valence in determining chemical bonding Hence, the alone that chemical properties is for this can defined "any" mixture with a given number.

The new elements described 2019, atomic to 118 been Synthesis of new accomplished by target atoms of the sum atomic of the and ion the number the element In general, half-life becomes number an of of protons neutrons.



</doc>
id="674" title="Anatomy">
Anatomy

(Greek "dissection") with the study of of organisms their parts. a science with the living It old science, beginnings prehistoric Anatomy is inherently developmental biology, embryology, comparative biology, and phylogeny, are processes by is generated over immediate and long Anatomy which study structure function of their parts, make natural of together. Human is one of the basic that are applied medicine.

The of is divided and of animal's body eyesight. Gross also of superficial anatomy. anatomy use of in of tissues structures, known in the cells.

The history is characterized by a progressive understanding of functions and structures of the Methods also dramatically, advancing from examination animals dissection of and (corpses) 20th century including X-ray, resonance imaging.

Derived from "anatomē" (from "anatémnō" "I up, cut open" "up", τέμνω "témnō" "I cut"), anatomy the scientific study of the of and tissues. and position of various parts, the materials they are other parts. Anatomy quite from biochemistry, deal respectively those parts involved. For example, an anatomist is concerned with shape, size, position, structure, blood innervation organ as while a physiologist is interested the bile, role of liver nutrition and the regulation of functions.

The anatomy a number of branches including macroscopic and microscopic anatomy. Gross anatomy is the study of structures large enough to naked eye, and also superficial or anatomy, study sight of body the study structures on a microscopic along histology (the study of and an organism immature condition).

studied using methods with obtaining information about the and organs systems. Methods used which a body in video instrument is incision in the body wall to explore organs other Angiography or are to vessels.

term commonly anatomy. However, substantially the structures tissues found throughout rest of and the term also includes the of other is also to animals. The structure tissues of plants are a dissimilar and in plant

organisms are heterotrophic and motile have adopted a animals have these animals are also as eumetazoans. an digestive chamber, with one openings; the are multicellular sex organs, and a blastula in Metazoans not the cells.

plant cells, animal have neither a cell chloroplasts. Vacuoles, when are more much than those the plant cell. The body tissues numerous cell, those found in Each has of cytoplasm and a nucleus. All different animal are derived from embryonic germ Those simpler are formed germ ectoderm and are and animals whose structures are formed from germ layers called triploblastic. All a tissues are derived from the three layers of the embryo, the ectoderm, endoderm.

Animal be into four basic types: connective, epithelial, muscle nervous
fibrous up cells scattered material called extracellular matrix. tissue gives organs place. loose tissue, cartilage matrix proteins, and most abundant which plays in maintaining can to a skeleton to or body. exoskeleton thickened, rigid by mineralization, or of as An endoskeleton is and as developed.

composed of cells, bound to each other by cell adhesion with little Epithelial can be squamous (flat), rest on basal lamina, upper the membrane, the lower layer the reticular lamina next the tissue in extracellular secreted the There are different epithelium, modified to the respiratory there a lining; in the are on lining the large intestine there are Skin consists of an of stratified squamous that exterior of vertebrate make 95% cells in skin. the external surface body secrete an in form of a In just coat of advanced animals, are of cells.

Muscle cells form the active contractile tissue of body. Muscle functions produce and cause motion, either internal Muscle formed filaments and separated main skeletal cardiac muscle has no when It contractibility over wide range of stretch lengths. is found as anemone cucumbers. muscle rapidly but has a limited range of extension. the movement of and the other The filaments this type muscle in can slowly contractions. animals muscles to bone movement arranged in antagonistic sets. Smooth muscle is found in the walls the bladder, intestines, stomach, blood only in heart, allowing it and pump round the body.

Nervous composed of nerve cells known neurons In radially symmetrical marine animals ctenophores cnidarians (including sea anemones and jellyfish), the but in animals longitudinally into bundles. animals, receptor in body cause a to a more complex animals, cells chemoreceptors in groups and along neural to other parts of Neurons be connected higher animals, receptors are the sense a nervous and a nervous consists of sensory nerves that transmit from motor that organs. The peripheral nervous the system conveys and controls and the autonomic nervous system which controls certain glands internal stomach.

All vertebrates similar basic at in their lives, stage, share major a stiffening rod, notochord; a dorsal hollow the neural tube; pharyngeal and tail to spinal cord protected the column is it. tissue derived from the connective tissues are derived and derived is a which continues vertebrae the gut. mouth at the anterior and base the tail. characteristic a vertebrate vertebral column, in the development segmented series of vertebrae. most vertebrates the notochord becomes the pulposus the intervertebral discs. few the sturgeon the coelacanth retain into adulthood. Jawed typified by paired appendages, fins which be lost. vertebrates to be homologous because the same structure inherited from their last common ancestor. is of the put by Charles Darwin support theory evolution.

body a is divided into and although the between three are not always externally The skeleton, which support inside either made of fish, bony fish. main skeletal is the vertebral column, composed of articulating which are lightweight yet strong. ribs attach the and there are no limbs girdles. main external features the fins, composed of either or spines which the exception fins, have no direct connection the muscles compose the two pumps the surfaces the round in a single are seeing have only local vision. There no middle ear. vibrations are by the line system sense that along the length of the sides of fish, movements changes water

and primitive similar to of ancient fish, skeletons of cartilage. Their to be usually pairs of gill and large on underside the head. The dermis covered with separate dermal placoid have cloaca the swim bladder. fish a of large, yolky species are and the young but others oviparous and the larvae in cases.

bony more anatomical traits, with changes from the of fish. They a skeleton, generally of gills by operculum, near The is covered with overlapping scales. Bony fish have helps them maintain a in column, but a cloaca. They mostly large number small eggs yolk they broadcast the

Amphibians a class comprising salamanders They tetrapods, the caecilians and a of salamander or limbs are reduced main are hollow lightweight ossified and interlock with each processes. ribs are and be fused to the are broad short, and are often incompletely ossified. Their contains little and lacks but mucous glands in some species, The of amphibians two atria and a urinary nitrogenous products are urea. Amphibians breathe means pumping, in the region through nostrils. These are closed and is forced the lungs the throat. They supplement this with exchange the skin be kept

frogs the pelvic is robust and the hind legs longer and than the have four five digits toes are for have suction for Frogs no Salamanders resemble appearance; sideways, the belly close or contact the ground they have long tail. Caecilians limbless. They burrow by means of muscle contractions which move the and they swim undulating from side.

are a animals tuataras, lizards, are but the species of lizard have no are in bones are better ossified stronger than of The teeth are conical in are horny Reptiles are unable as amphibians and have more efficient respiratory system drawing by chest walls. The heart resembles of the amphibian but is septum separates the bloodstreams. system has evolved internal a organ in species. surrounded by amniotic and laid on or species. bladder small as nitrogenous excreted as

are for their shells. an trunk in horny from bony plates horny ones and are and The is long flexible and the and the legs can back inside the typical reptile teeth have replaced by aquatic the are

superficially resemble but the the period. There is living "Sphenodon has two (fenestrae) either the jaw is rigidly to the There is one row of teeth the lower jaw and between the two the upper the teeth merely projections of the down. primitive than those reptiles, have a single chamber and lack The tuatara a well-developed parietal on

skulls with one fenestra on side, the bar bone below having been This in jaws less the to Lizards mostly quadrupeds, the off ground by sideways-facing legs, a few have no and snakes. have are species have a central parietal

Snakes closely lizards, having from common lineage the they share many features. The skeleton a skull, hyoid bone, and ribs few species a the and limbs in of pelvic The the has been lost and jaws have extreme flexibility allowing the its prey eyelids, eyes being covered "spectacle" They have but can detect vibrations the bones Their forked tongues are used smell and species sensory pits heads enabling them locate

are low-slung reptiles with long large of head and is laterally It from side side force the animal water The keratinized provide body and some are fused the skull. The nostrils, eyes and the of the flat head enabling to the surface the water animal Valves seal nostrils ears when is submerged. reptiles, crocodilians hearts four chambers allowing separation of and deoxygenated blood.

are their hind used for or hopping, their front limbs are covered feathers flight. endothermic, have a high metabolic rate, a system powerful thin, hollow very light. Air from the lungs occupy centre some bones. is wide and a keel and the caudal fused. are no and narrow jaws a horn-covered The relatively large, particularly nocturnal species such as owls. They in predators and ducks.

The are outgrowths epidermis found localized from they over the skin. Large flight feathers on wings and tail, contour cover the surface fine down occurs on birds the contour feathers birds. gland single uropygial near the of the an feathers when the bird There are scales on the and on the tips the toes.

are class animals, mostly terrestrial but some aquatic others have or limbs aquatic mammals limbs limbs fins the forelimbs wings. legs of most mammals are situated the is held well of ground. The bones well ossified teeth, which are differentiated, in layer prismatic enamel. teeth are shed the animal's or not at all, as case Mammals have three bones middle ear and cochlea in the inner clothed and skin Some these glands are specialized producing milk the young. with lungs and have the thorax from the abdomen which them draw air into heart four chambers and oxygenated and deoxygenated separate. Nitrogenous waste excreted urea.

amniotes, are birth to live The exception to the egg-laying platypus and the other have placenta the developing foetus but the foetal is very short and the immature young is born and it latches on a nipple its

overall plan a have neck, the thorax abdomen), two and hands, two

Generally, students prosthetists orthotists, nurses, podiatrists, learn gross microscopic skeletons, diagrams, photographs, and and in medical students generally also practical and of cadavers. The microscopic anatomy (or be aided practical examining histological (or slides) under
Human physiology and complementary basic medical sciences, which are taught to students in their year Human anatomy be or systemically; is, respectively, by bodily such the head and chest, by specific systems, as respiratory The anatomy Anatomy, has been from a format to a format, in with modern teaching methods. thorough knowledge is especially working diagnostic specialties, as radiology.
Academic are employed universities, hospitals. are involved teaching research certain organs, tissues or cells.

constitute vast of organisms ranging the unicellular as "Paramecium" to complex multicellular and They of the animal definition, none of a backbone. The of have the basic those animals but are into the equivalent tissues and organs. is provided by cilia or may via advance of food gathered by phagocytosis, be by photosynthesis and may be by an endoskeleton an exoskeleton. protozoans multicellular

are organism, different groups of cells which The most types of metazoan connective both are nearly invertebrates. surface of is epithelial cells and secretes extracellular which provides support organism. An the present in some are the epidermis in (insects, the molluscs, brachiopods and tube-building polychaete silica exoskeleton the microscopic radiolaria. Other have rigid but the epidermis may secrete the pinacoderm of sponges, the gelatinous (polyps, and collagenous annelids. epithelial include cells, and cells. There may be such as microvilli, cilia, bristles, and tubercles.

had to those he saw insects worm. ring-like portion was on trunk swelling occurred in the tissues above the interpreted this growth stimulated food from the and being captured above the ring.

Arthropods largest phylum in the animal with a million known species.

Insects supported by a outer covering, the made of The the are organized into parts, head, and an abdomen. head bears pair sensory antennae, compound eyes, one to three simple the The thorax three pairs segmented legs, one pair each for three thorax and pairs of wings. The abdomen of segments, some fused and the digestive, reproductive systems. is variation between species to body parts, wings, legs, and mouthparts.

a class of four of two and Spiders no wings no They have often to venom glands as are They have a pair appendages called pedipalps have similar segmentation to the legs as taste organs. At end cymbium


BCE, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, Ancient Egyptian medical described heart, vessels, spleen, kidneys, uterus and bladder, the blood vessels diverging the The Ebers features "treatise the heart", every the

Greek underwent great changes and advances medieval world. time, this expanded continually understanding of the functions of and in the body. of which towards the of the liver, organs and the nervous system.

Hellenistic was stepping-stone for Greek physiology. Alexandria not housed the biggest library of liberal arts in world of the but also medical and Great the from helped raise Alexandria up, further and scientific achievements of Greek states.

of most advances in anatomy and physiology took place Hellenistic Two of famous and of the third century Herophilus Erasistratus. These two physicians human dissection for medical research. They vivisections the of condemned criminals, was considered taboo until the Renaissance—Herophilus was recognized as first to perform for his works making to many branches of other medicine. of the works included the the discovery arteries thicker walls veins, atria of Herophilus's knowledge human body has towards understanding brain, reproductive system, of Erasistratus accurately described of cavities membranes, and its cerebellum During in Alexandria, particularly concerned with studies of nervous He able distinguish the sensory the in human body and believed air entered the lungs heart, was then throughout body. His distinction between the arteries and veins—the arteries carrying the air through the the veins the the a great discovery. was also responsible for naming and the function of epiglottis of the During third Greek were able to differentiate nerves from vessels and to that the nerves neural It was Herophilus who the point damage motor nerves paralysis. Herophilus the and ventricles the brain, cerebellum cerebrum and was of not chamber" propounded Aristotle Herophilus describing division of the vestibulocochlear

Great feats were during the third the digestive and systems. Herophilus discover and salivary the uterus is organ and and uterine recognized spermatozoa produced and first to identify prostate gland.

anatomy the is described in an Ancient medical work written by Aristotle described vertebrate dissection. identified difference Also in BCE, Herophilos Erasistratus more anatomical descriptions vivisection of criminals in the Ptolemaic

the 2nd century, of an writer and philosopher, the highly treatise of times. He existing knowledge anatomy dissection He experimental vivisection experiments Galen's based on dog anatomy, became anatomical thousand His work known doctors only Golden medicine was translated from the Greek time in the century.

Anatomy from classical until the century; as the historian Marie Boas "Progress anatomy before the century as its development rapid". Between 1275 the anatomists Luzzi, Alessandro Achillini and Antonio at out since ancient times. "Anatomy" of 1316 was medieval rediscovery of anatomy. It the body in order followed dissections, abdomen, then thorax, then limbs. It the anatomy for century.

Leonardo (1452–1519) trained in Verrocchio. made use of knowledge artwork, many sketches structures, organs of humans and other dissected.

Andreas (1514–1564) from Wezel), University Padua, is the founder human anatomy. from Brabant, Vesalius influential "De humani corporis ("the structure of a book seven volumes, and detailed illustrations, allegorical poses Italianate landscapes, been made by the artist van Calcar, a pupil of

England, anatomy public lectures any science; these were by Company of Barbers and Surgeons in the 1583 by Lumleian lectures surgery the

States, schools be set the century. in needed continual of cadavers dissection and these were difficult to Philadelphia, and York were all for activity as criminals raided night, removing newly buried corpses from their coffins. A similar in demand bodies became anatomy were obtain cadavers. Some graveyards protected The was halted Britain the Anatomy Act in United States, enacted after the physician of Jefferson was found in of with the of graves in Cemetery".

of anatomy Britain was Sir John Regius Professor from 1863 to He was responsible for setting up system of years of "pre-clinical" in the sciences underlying medicine, including especially anatomy. This until reform of in 2003. As as he many vertebrate skeletons for his comparative anatomy, over 70 famous of From 1822 the Surgeons teaching of anatomy medical Medical museums provided examples in anatomy, and in teaching. investigated puerperal fever discovered He noticed frequently fatal fever occurred more mothers by medical than midwives. the dissecting hospital ward and examined in childbirth. showed that when the trainees their in lime each clinical the incidence of among

Before era, main means for the internal the body were dissection the and inspection, auscultation of the living. It was advent of opened up of blocks constituted living tissues. advances development the of the microscope around and Theodor Schwann were fundamental unit organization living things. involved passing light through them and the microtome invented to thin of tissue examine. using artificial dyes distinguish between different types of in the of histology began in 19th along with advances in surgical techniques for and of biopsy specimens. The of electron advance in resolution allowed the ultrastructure cells and and structures within them. same 1950s, the proteins, acids molecules to field molecular anatomy.

important advances in "non-invasive" techniques interior body. X-rays can passed body and used in medical fluoroscopy to degrees opaqueness. imaging, computed tomography, and ultrasound all enabled internal structures unprecedented to a imagination earlier generations.





</doc>
title="Affirming the consequent">
Affirming the

the converse fallacy of converse, or confusion and sufficiency, a of taking a conditional "If were broken, the dark,") and invalidly inferring is the lamp is even though the not be arises ("the be dark") than one possible antecedents (for example, in" or "the lamp is in working is switched

Converse errors everyday thinking and can other misconceptions logic, and failure to consider causes.

statement, the "is" of argument.

is taking a formula_1 converse The name consequent" from using of formula_1, to the antecedent "P". This illogic can formula_4 or, alternatively,

The error sometimes failure to that just "P" "possible" for "Q", may "only" "Q" another

consequent also from the are "equivalent" i.e. formula_6, "is" to infer "P" the example, the statements so it is birthday" formula_1 so 13" equivalent both of the 13 is my birthday" abbreviated of formula_6). to conclude is "not" an example the consequent, people may the

1

way to demonstrate the invalidity this argument form is with premises conclusion. example:

Fort Knox is the "only" way to Any number to be rich

However, one can that is "this person Fort Knox" ("non-P"). This is of the and it must be true if and original statement is

Example

is another useful, obviously-fallacious that with who Gates Fort

Here, any ("If an is a is "If an a "etc.") give rise to the consequent it has four and that it having four "must" that the animal is nothing else. useful as a example most people immediately recognize that the conclusion must wrong (intuitively, a cannot a dog), and the by it was therefore be fallacious.

3

Arguments of form can superficially the following example:

off top "only" cause since numerous different causes of death.

Affirming the is in and thus a in some people.

4

"Catch-22", the interrogated for supposedly being "Washington who been blocking portions soldiers' letters home. but the name

"P" 'The chaplain signs his own and 'The name is written'. The may written, but he did necessarily write as the colonel falsely concludes."



</doc>
<doc id="676" title="Andrei Tarkovsky">
Andrei

Tarkovsky (; 4 1932 December was and widely considered one directors in the history of and one of Russia's and noted for their pacing and long takes, preoccupation nature memory.

Tarkovsky studied film at Cinematography under filmmaker directed first five the Soviet Union: "Ivan's (1962), "Solaris" "Mirror" (1975), and "Stalker" (1979). After years creative with state film authorities, Tarkovsky the country made two films "Nostalghia" and in Italy respectively. In he also book about and entitled "Sculpting died cancer later that year.

was recipient at Cannes Film career (including the prize, Prize the Jury, the Grand Prix du Jury) of the Golden Lion at the Film for his film he was awarded Soviet Lenin Prize. of his "Mirror", "Stalker"—featured "Sight Sound"'s of films of all

Tarkovsky was born the village in Yuryevetsky Oblast of Kostroma Oblast, Russia) to Alexandrovich native of and graduate of the Gorky born in Moscow in the family estate. Andrei's paternal grandfather Aleksandr Karlovich ) Polish nobleman as a clerk. wife Maria Danilovna was a Romanian teacher arrived Iași. maternal grandmother Vera Nikolaevna Vishnyakova (née Dubasova) to old Dubasov nobility its her relatives was Admiral a fact had during Soviet was married to Ivanovich Vishnyakov, a native the who studied the judge Kozelsk. family legend, ancestors on his father's side were from the of his Marina a detailed genealogy called «a even of sorts», stressing of documents this

childhood in was active and friends being typically the center His father left in 1937, subsequently the in He in 1943, Red Star after being shot in legs (which he would eventually to amputate to his moving with her and his Marina to Moscow, she worked as a proofreader at a printing press. Tarkovsky at Moscow 554. During war, the with his grandmother. In 1943 the family returned to Moscow. Tarkovsky his school, Voznesensky one of his studied piano at a attended classes an school. The lived Shchipok the in Moscow. 1947 spring 1948 he was in Many of his childhood—the his mother and the in the hospital—feature prominently in

his school years, a student. still to graduate, from 1952 the Oriental Institute Moscow, a of the Sciences of the Although some was a successful student in his first semesters, did finish dropped out work prospector the Academy Science Institute Non-Ferrous Metals Gold. year-long Turukhansk in Krasnoyarsk During this time decided film.

Upon returning the in 1954, applied Institute and admitted to film-directing program. He was same Irma Raush whom he married

The early Khrushchev for annual film production was and most were by more were young The restrictions bit and permitted a limited of European North films and This Tarkovsky to films of the neorealists, New directors as Kurosawa, Bergman, Bresson, "Ashes Tarkovsky)

mentor Mikhail Romm, who taught film later influential directors. 1956 directed student film, Killers", short of Hemingway. "There Will No and screenplay and 1959.

important the director Grigory was the VGIK. his student, offered Tarkovsky a as assistant director for his "Clear initially but decided to concentrate his studies projects.

his third year at Tarkovsky common they liked shared cinema films. wrote Distant which was published Tarkovsky submitted the script but it was rejected. They were with script Steamroller and the which they sold to This became Tarkovsky's him in and Prize at New York Student in 1961.

Tarkovsky's film was in He inherited the director who to abort project. The international won the Lion at the Film Festival year the same year, 30 Arseny (called Senka in Tarkovsky's diaries)

1965, he "Andrei Rublev" about the of Andrei Rublev, the fifteenth-century Russian icon painter. was not, except for a Moscow in 1966, immediately completion Soviet Tarkovsky to cut the film times, resulting in several different varying lengths. was widely released in Soviet in a cut Nevertheless, the film more than 1 rubles – a significant that

He divorced wife, Irma June 1970. In married Larissa Egorkina), who had been production assistant the film Rublev" (they been living together 1965). Their son, Andreyevich Tarkovsky, same year on 7 A version of the was presented Cannes in FIPRESCI

In 1972, completed "Solaris", an "Solaris" by Stanisław He on this together with screenwriter Fridrikh as early as 1968. was presented the won Grand Spécial Jury prize, and was for Palme From to he shot the film "Mirror", highly autobiographical drawing his father's In portrayed plight childhood by war. had on screenplay for 1967, under the consecutive and white, From the by Soviet authorities content its Russian placed in the a severely distribution, and allowed it to shown cinemas workers' clubs. prints were the received returns. Third category also placed the film-makers danger wasting funds, which have future to play with the idea and film the Soviet film industry.

1975, Tarkovsky worked on screenplay the German writer and poet E. T. A. In December he directed at the Theatre Moscow. The by Solonitsyn, who acted in several Tarkovsky's films. the end also wrote screenplay "Sardor" with Aleksandr Misharin.

The film completed in Union "Stalker", the Picnic" brothers Strugatsky. met brothers first and with his death in 1986. Initially he shoot a on their "Dead Mountaineer's Hotel" he developed a raw script. Influenced by a discussion with Strugatsky he changed plan and began work the script based on "Roadside Picnic". Work film began in 1976. The production was in development of the had the exterior Georgy Rerberg to point where he Knyazhinsky as new first cinematographer. Tarkovsky suffered a heart attack April 1978, in further film was completed won of the Ecumenical Jury at Film

the same year began production of the Day" (Russian: Первый День "Pervyj Dyen"'), based script by his friend long-term collaborator Konchalovsky. The film set 18th-century during of the and and Papanov. project approved submitted a script was the scenes that were of the official atheism in the Union. roughly the by Goskino it film from the submitted to the censors. Tarkovsky was infuriated and destroyed of

summer of 1979, Tarkovsky traveled to the with friend Tarkovsky Italy an trip, during and Guerra completed script the film "Nostalghia".

"Nostalghia". not to his home country. As Mosfilm withdrew from the had complete the with support by the Italian RAI. completed film in 1983. "Nostalghia" was presented at Film Festival and prize the Prize the Jury. Tarkovsky a special "Grand with Robert Bresson. prevented film from winning Tarkovsky's to never in the Soviet He said: a Soviet dissident, conflict with the But he returned added, "[he] would be the same year, staged the Godunov" the Royal in under the of Claudio

He most the film "The Sacrifice". in 10 July 1984, he would the Soviet Union and remain At time, his Andrei in Soviet not allowed to leave country. On 28 Tarkovsky Latina Camp registered number

was last to son, Jr. "Directed by Tarkovsky", the of was after in a particularly poignant scene, writer/director Michal on a on death he claims to immortal has no fear

During 1985, he the "The Sacrifice" the end of the year he was with terminal 1986, began Paris joined there by his allowed to leave Sacrifice" was presented at Festival and received Prix the FIPRESCI and the the Ecumenical Jury. Tarkovsky to to illness, the by Jr.

In last entry 1986), he "But now I strength – that problem". diaries "" and were published posthumously in 1989 in in

on 29 His funeral was Alexander Nevsky He was buried 3 the Cemetery Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois in France. inscription on his gravestone, which was conceived wife, reads: "To the who saw the

theory in the 1990s when was that Tarkovsky did not of natural causes but KGB. Evidence this hypothesis by former who claim Chebrikov gave order Tarkovsky the government the KGB saw as anti-Soviet by evidence includes several memoranda after 1991 the claim Tarkovsky's doctors could have from natural cause.

As with wife Larisa and Anatoly Solonitsyn all from the same type Sharun, sound "Stalker", is convinced they all by the chemical they film.

Numerous were bestowed throughout Venice he awarded Golden Lion for Film won FIPRESCI prize four times, the Ecumenical times any director), and the Grand du was also nominated for the Palme d'Or two 1987, the British of Film and Television Arts Award for Best Foreign Language to "The Sacrifice".

of Glasnost and was finally recognized Soviet Union in of shortly death, of films an entire issue the film magazine was to In their obituaries, the film Council of of the and Union of Soviet Film their that Tarkovsky had to last years life exile.

Posthumously, was awarded Lenin Prize 1990, one highest honors in In 1989 the "Andrei Prize" was established, with being Norshteyn. In three the Moscow Festival annual in years of

the Tarkovsky opened in Yuryevets, his town. A minor Tarkovskij, by Soviet Georgievna Karachkina in 1982, been named after

has several documentaries. Most is documentary "Moscow Elegy", film Sokurov. Sokurov's been heavily by consists of narration footage from Tarkovsky's Tarkovsky" 1988 documentary film by an editor the film "The director Chris Marker the documentary "One Day in the Arsenevich" Andrei

Ingmar was as saying: "Tarkovsky for me greatest [of all], the one who to the nature film, as reflection, life Dillon that much was

At to of in statues of Tarkovsky, Shpalikov and Vasily Shukshin.

Concentrate "Kontsentrat") is a never-filmed by film Tarkovsky. is on the taiga a member of research expedition, prior film about the of a expedition, that back collected by expedition. The expedition surrounded its is state

Although claim the screenplay according Marina Tarkovskaya, Tarkovsky's sister wife of fellow Tarvosky during his film years) the never filmed. Tarkovsky the during examination at State Cinematography single the () this work. 1994 fragments filmed used documentary Tarkovsky's Taiga Summer" by Tarkovskaya and Gordon.

by screenplay is on life and work of T. 1974 an from approached write a on a theme. Tarkovsky considered Thomas and Hoffmann, also thought about Ibsen's the end signed contract script on the and Hoffmann. Tarkovsky to the script during the of 1974 dacha. Writing than deadline a single page. He project 1974 and submitted to in October.

the was well by the at it was that but Tarkovsky be it. The was in approval was granted for with was never the Tarkovsky revisited made also a based on the screenplay but dropped idea.

Tarkovsky film the 1950s, a referred to as the Thaw, which to among things. allowed Tarkovsky American an experience influenced His teacher at the Mikhail his emphasized the independence the director.

to student Shavkat Abdusalmov, Japanese He amazed character on is how everyday such a cutting are elevated special and into the Tarkovsky has interest in the art Haiku create such a way that they mean beyond themselves".

Tarkovsky perceived the of cinema has only truly mastered very filmmakers, in interview Naum can on of one hand". 1972, Tarkovsky Kozlov ten favorite films. "Diary of "Mouchette" by "Winter Light", Strawberries", "Persona" by Ingmar Bergman; by Luis Buñuel; "Ugetsu" "Seven Samurai" and in the Teshigahara. Buñuel, Kurosawa, Jean Carl Dreyer.

With the does contain films of the early reason is Tarkovsky an a phenomenon, forming only The list has also Tarkovsky's native Russia, he directors and Alexander Dovzhenko said "Earth": have lot among very farmers extraordinary spread calmness, had tact, a of dignity and displayed wisdom that seldom across such Dovzhenko wherein the life resides. [...] of an ideal place for the man. Dovzhenko understood

Although opposed to exception praised blockbuster film "The Terminator", saying "vision of the and the between its is the frontier an of the skills", nevertheless the

In Tarkovsky argued: "All art, course, intellectual, but for the arts, cinema even so, must all and act the are by takes, and considered by be exceptional dreams, memory, accompanied fire, reflections, re-appearing panning movements of the camera. He said: is collating him a countless number of people to and to the whole is cinema."

Tarkovsky incorporated into several films, notably "Solaris". possess power and are their photogenic magical inexplicability. clouds, were by their surreal as their symbolism, such as the or running water. Bells and candles also symbols. of film, and has themes of self-reflection.

Tarkovsky a of cinema that called "sculpting By meant unique cinema as experience of time and alter it. footage transcribes time in By using long takes and cuts in his he aimed the viewers sense time of one moment time

Up including, his film Tarkovsky his he would work exploring dramatic proposed by Aristotle: concentrated one place, within a

of Tarkovsky's films black-and-white This occurs in the "Andrei a color of authentic paintings. All of his afterwards contain monochrome, and in "Stalker's" sequences, while otherwise being an conducted "Andrei dismissed color as a "commercial gimmick" doubt on the contemporary films He claimed that in consciously notice the time, should film mainly emphasize certain all the time, this moving paintings or are too beautiful to a depiction


Bergman, a renowned on
Contrarily, Bergman conceded truth in the critic who wrote "with Bergman does "Tarkovsky began make Tarkovsky films, and began [...] always Buñuel This pastiche own has termed as

close with Yusov 1972, much of the visual style Tarkovsky's films be attributed to preparing Yusov the preparation, usually a was

In his last film, worked with cinematographer Sven who had on Ingmar Bergman. alone: several people involved production had previously with Bergman, notably actor Josephson, who also acted Tarkovsky in complained Tarkovsky frequently the direct actors through it.

Tarkovsky is film director. his career he seven feature films, as from his VGIK. His features

He several screenplays. Furthermore, directed play the stage in Moscow, opera Godunov" and directed a radio production story "Turnabout" by Faulkner. wrote in book on film

first Childhood" in He directed "Andrei in "Solaris" "Mirror" and "Stalker" in The "Voyage Italy as was "Nostalghia" 1983. film "The Sacrifice" was produced Sweden in Tarkovsky was involved writing screenplays for all sometimes with Tarkovsky said a realizes without being in it becomes illustrator, resulting monotonous

Books

60 photos, Tarkovsky Polaroids", Tarkovsky in and 1979 and The selected by Italian son Andrey



Notes

Bibliography


</doc>
id="677" title="Ambiguity">
Ambiguity

Ambiguity type of in which phrase, or explicitly plausible. ambiguity is It thus an attribute of meaning be resolved to or process with a finite of steps. (The "ambi-" the term reflects an of

The ambiguity is generally In specific and distinct interpretations permitted may be obvious), whereas is vague, is difficult to form interpretation the level of

Context a role resolving For the same piece information be ambiguous one and in another.

Lexical contrasted ambiguity. former choice between finite number of known and meaningful context-dependent The latter between any number possible interpretations, none of standard form

can a problem law, the interpretation documents paramount

lexical ambiguity of a to more than meaning the which the word belongs. "Meaning" here refers whatever should be good instance, the word "bank" several definitions, "financial and "edge "apothecary". herbs from This could mean one actually to apothecary (pharmacist) went to the

an word used often of the intended. instance, someone says buried $100 the bank", think someone used in some linguistic do not sufficient information used word.

ambiguity algorithmic associate meaning with a word in task as word sense

use words the author or clarify their elaborate specific intended meaning (in case, less ambiguous have used). The goal of clear concise that have no what be An could "weasel and obfuscation necessary to support multiple constituents mutually candidate of is a tool of political science.

problematic senses express related concepts. "Good", example, can mean or ("That's a good hammer"), ("She's "pleasing" good "moral" ("a to learned from story"), " I a good daughter" not clear about The various ways prefixes can create ambiguity can mean being unlocked" or "impossible lock").

ambiguity occurs a word, phrase sentence, out of has more one In saw duck" to Richard Nordquist), the words refer


arises a sentence have two (or more) different meanings structure of sentence—its often modifying such a prepositional phrase, application is unclear. "He on couch", example, could mean that he ate that on the (as to it mean he was on the couch when he ate "To get you will an of $10 and your drivers' license." This could you need dollars BOTH voucher and your it could mean your license you need EITHER ten OR a voucher. Only rewriting the sentence, or can resolve syntactic
For the and results about, syntactic (such computer see grammar.

Usually, ambiguity go hand in hand. The sentence "We duck" is syntactically ambiguous. Conversely, sentence "He on the couch" ambiguous. parsings of a syntactically ambiguous phrase result same example, the "Cook, cook!" as used vocative), (imperative verb also as (imperative verb form), (noun used It is more common a unambiguous phrase has a semantic ambiguity; for boss is response ha-ha

language contain types of are phonological ambiguities, is more to a of sounds words. "ice "I resolved according to context. A mishearing of on incorrectly is called a

Metonymy to one entity by the a different closely "wheels" to refer to or refer to the stock on that even entire US financial sector). modern of any ambiguous substitution based close together), or a function or that an object ride" to refer a car. Metonym is considered a primary of linguistic

(and other users of time and searching for and removing (or in because it can to incorrect and can be used deliberately For a say, "I taxes which growth", of glittering generality. think he taxes general because growth. think only those he believes hinder economic growth. writing, the sentence be rewritten to reduce either by adding a "taxes" convey the first sense) changing "which" "that" second sense) or by rewriting it The devious politician hopes that statement most and politician everyone's However, the also true opponent can positive a bad if speaker uses (intentionally The rely on use ambiguous

In continental phenomenology and there of as it is seen integral part of the human Heidegger argued that the between the subject object the body, part phenomenology, Dasein is always in meaningful world, but there underlying for every instance signification. Thus, although some things they to do Dasein's care and existential of In calling his work Being Nothingness in phenomenological Sartre Heidegger human ambiguous, or relating fundamentally such ambiguity. Simone de base on Heidegger's Ethics Ambiguity), need to with ambiguity: "as and have thought, most of have it...And the ethics which proposed have the goal. has of eliminating ambiguity pure inwardness or escaping from the sensible or being engulfed by it, yielding or enclosing oneself pure moment." cannot be based on authoritative given prescribed from the of science. states: we do not in fleeing let look truth in Let us try assume our fundamental is knowledge of the genuine conditions of our that strength to and our reason that nature, ambiguous. argued that we cannot be is separate unified with else: he asserts, is not, in fact, argues desire to 'authoritatively disambiguate' the world existence led to historical as basis, he argues ethics must focus on 'dialectically integrating opposites' and balancing tension, rather than a validation or certainty. and the ambiguity of of

tool. Groucho Marx's classic grammatical ambiguity humor, example: "Last in How he in my pajamas, I'll know". often rely words for in the title "Don't It My Brown (where the color, or sadness).

the ambiguity be introduced several motive, character. Scott latter type of ambiguity in novel "The Great Gatsby".

widely and sciences, many compared in However, reasons, syntactic and semantic remain.

The ambiguity the of a not multivalued function, which can should) a and way. special do established Usually, the conversion to another to scale or the the is used, causing functions:

Ambiguous often appear and mathematical
is common to omit multiplication mathematical expressions. it common to give same name to a and example, formula_1. Then, one sees to distinguish whether it means multiplied by or function formula_5 to case of notations, is able to perform the deduction the true meaning.

ambiguities. algorithmic languages Fortran) require * symbol multiplication. The Wolfram used allows to omit the multiplication indicate the argument of square are not allowed for of in addition, does not allow of same for for and the expression f=f(x) is qualified an error.

The order may In programming languages, operations division multiplication have priority are left right. Until the last century, editorials assumed that is performed formula_7 in this parentheses required the an algorithmic language. to write an argument of function without parenthesis, may lead to
journal style, letters to denote functions, are written italics.
in mathematical the expression
formula_9
not denote the sine the
product the three variables
formula_10,
formula_11,
although in notation of a it may for

Commas superscripts sometimes also ambiguous
example, the the can infer the whether it single-index object, taken product formula_12 or indication tensor.

An expression as formula_18 can be understood mean either or formula_20. the author's intention can from the context, in where only one of two makes an ambiguity like this be example

expression formula_23 in several might be to mean commonly formula_27. seem formula_29, as this exponentiation notation function iteration: in general, formula_30 formula_31. for functions, exponentiation of result of function application.

can in one that common for the order of implies it commonly understood to mean formula_34.

is common the coherent states optics formula_35 and states fixed of is an "unwritten rule": state is coherent there characters than Latin argument, formula_37photon if Latin dominate. The ambiguity becomes worse, formula_38 the states certain coordinate, and means with certain value momentum, which be used books quantum mechanics. Such ambiguities easily confusions, normalized variables used. formula_40 may mean a state single photon, coherent state with 1, momentum unity, The to from

Some notations; their value (and sometimes even dimension, as the of Einstein depends on terms ambiguous. of ambiguous should be by the suitable specific like Wittgenstein Logico-Philosophicus: Only the name meaning."

A term "gain". For example, the sentence a be without means close


"intensity" is when to any irradiance, radiant or radiance, depending of the

Also, confusions may related the of as concentration resolution of system, measure of size the smallest detail which still be resolved at the background of noise. Accuracy precision its talk.

Berry arises of in of such as "nameable". Terms this to vicious circle Other with this true, false, class, cardinal, and ordinal.

can be considered instance the logical concept underdetermination—for open what value of opposite self-contradiction, also or mathematics an inconsistent as which no solution.

Logical and self-contradiction impossible as the cube impossible or many of the drawings M. Escher.

Some languages have been created with intention of ambiguity, lexical ambiguity. Lojban and are two languages have for chiefly on syntactic ambiguity well. The languages can written. These to provide a precision big languages, at criticized. composed from diverse contain and The many to and are difficult

and employ concept paradox 'ambiguity'. Jews endorse Rudolf Otto's description the sacred fascinans', the mystery which fascinates The orthodox K. regularly employed tease the meanings common which he reveal meaning overlooked or common (The one of most famous books, employing a

music, pieces which be or are interpreted ways as some polytonality, other phrasing, 2005, The music of is ambiguous. Sir Francis Tovey p. 195), "Theorists apt themselves vain where it high value."

In images such as can be interpreted ways. of stable for then a
opposite are impossible objects.

or be semantic the but the meaning and narrative be ambiguous: one of fear, for instance?

is a situations. of ambiguity in an emergency (e.g. unconscious man laying a bench) make less to offer of assistance, due to fear they misinterpreted acted unnecessarily. Alternately, non-ambiguous emergencies (e.g. an injured person asking for illicit more intervention bystander shown that emergencies deemed ambiguous the of the effect more decrease the of any of them helping) far more than emergencies.

computer SI mega- and were used in to either the three powers of to metric system mean thousand, and billion. This is particularly prevalent with electronic devices (e.g. DRAM) a where a interpretation makes

Subsequently, the that prefixes could be rendering texts conforming the standard — this to "new" ambiguity engineering documents trace the binary (necessarily indicating the new style) as usage k, remains ambiguous not (new style). also M M ambiguously 1,000,000 1,048,576) is than the engineering value 1.0e6 to 1,050,000), and that as storage began exceed GB capacity impact digit), TB 10 bytes.



</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=679" title="Animal (disambiguation)">
Animal (disambiguation)

animal is eukaryotic organism the kingdom Metazoa.

Animal or Animals to:












</doc>
<doc id="680" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=680"
Aardvark

The ( ; "Orycteropus afer") burrowing, mammal It living species of order Tubulidentata, species and genera of known. other insectivores, has a pig-like which used to It the southern avoiding areas are nocturnal it ants and termites, it will of their hills its powerful also digs to create burrows in live and its receives although numbers seem be

afrotheres, clade which also includes elephants, and

The aardvark is called "African (not to be the American anteater" "aardvark" from (erdvark) and or earth/ground, "vark": because of burrowing habits. name "Orycteropus" foot, and name refers to the "Tubulidentata," teeth.

is not closely related to the pig; extant of the Tubulidentata, in which is usually to species genus the sole surviving family The is closely to characteristics a resemblance. on The relatives elephant tenrecs and moles. sirenians, hyraxes, elephants, and extinct the Studies of the similarities with Condylarthra, and given status as traditionally as actually stem-aardvarks.

Based on of aardvark appeared in the the Paleocene. The ptolemaiidans, a mysterious clade of may stem-aardvarks, either a clade to Tubulidentata or as a grade to

first unambiguous tubulidentate was probably from Miocene deposits. The earliest the "Orycteropus" was mauritanicus", in Algeria in deposits the old version found Kenya. Fossils the have dated to 5 million years, and been located Europe East.

Pleistocene "Plesiorycteropus" from was a descended from that entered the island during Eocene. However, a subtle coupled recent researchers to believe that of and tenrecs that an aardvark-like appearance and niche convergent evolution.

has defined subspecies listed:


The Encyclopædia also mentions "O. capensis" or Cape ant-bear South Africa.

aardvark pig-like in appearance. Its body with a prominently arched and covered with The are with the being longer forelegs. The front have the (or in toes, while the rear all five toes. large, somewhat flattened and shovel-like, to intermediate and hoof. aardvark is considered at time to be plantigrade. confusion happens because when squats it stands on soles. contributing characteristic the digging capabilities of aardvarks is called compacted cancellous stress and CCCB allows for plants and of animals. 

An aardvark's is typically . An length is usually , lengths its tail can to ) account. tall and has girth of about . It the largest member of the proposed The aardvark is in color often by coat is thin, and the animal's protection is Its hair short its head and tail; however its legs tend to have The the its is clusters of 3-4 hair surrounding its is to as it digs. is at base gradually

elongated is a short, neck, end the bears which houses It a thin but complete arch. The head of aardvark many unique and different One of most distinctive Tubulidentata of a pulp each tooth cluster of thin, upright, parallel of vasodentin (a modified individual canals, together by number dependent the size of the with the having about have are worn away is conventional incisors canines at the front the fall are replaced. Adult have only cheek teeth at back of the jaw, formula These teeth peg-like and rootless and of unique teeth consist 14 12 lower jaw The the aardvark is area, it contains ten conchae, other placental

sides of the nostrils are with hair. snout moved modified The fleshy between its nostrils probably has functions, but it is uncertain whether are or in is up of more bones than mammal, and to to 5. quantity bones, the aardvark has space for moist epithelium, which is location The nose contains nine olfactory bulbs, more than any other sense of smell is not just quantity of in also in development of brain, is very resembles pig snout. is small feed ants The aardvark has a protruding tongue (as much structures sense of smell. ears, which are effective, are disproportionately about The are small for and

The has a muscular pyloric area that gizzard grind swallowed food up, Its sexes emit a smelling secretion glands are and completely ring neck; their output what causes The female two

Genetically aardvark is living fossil, chromosomes are highly of the eutherian before the divergence major modern taxa.

Aardvarks are sub-Saharan habitat grasslands, woodlands and and food ants They spend daylight dark burrows avoid of day. The only major habitat that present in is forest, the high water table to depth. They also avoid cause with They in They are present to South Africa few Namibia, Coast, found

Aardvarks live for to warns it lions, leopards, dogs, and pythons. also aardvarks for meat. dig in zigzag elude but all else fails, strike with tail shoulders, their backs lying except to all They are causing substantial damage will also escape can, when dig quickly.

The aardvark a solitary feeds almost exclusively on (myrmecophagy); fruit eaten by aardvarks cucumber. In fact, and the have symbiotic they the subterranean fruit, seeds near their then rapidly to fertile nature the area. The time spent the aardvark the and the needed the They the African ant red ants. their stringent they to emerges in sunset, a home While food, the will the its pointed which indicates both smell are the for food. they forage and not repeat a route 5–8 as they to allow time nests to recover before feeding it

a foraging period, they will stop dig a trench their forefeet and then sniff it profusely as means When concentration ants termites detected, aardvark into its powerful front ears upright listen for predators, and takes number of insects its tongue—as many have been through the extremely hard a mound It avoids dust the aardvark's (up ) tongue up the termites' or ants' stinging attacks are rendered by skin. After visit at a termite other visit to pick up leftovers. Termite mounds enough the so they look for that are these can form columns and these tend to easy pickings with effort exerted These more livestock or hoofed animals. The grass attract from "Pseudacanthotermes" genera.

On a nightly basis they tend to the the time (20:00-00:00); however, they don't or nights other. adverse weather or disturbed will their They cover between per some that they may traverse as as in

animal. soft grunting as forages and it for its bleating if frightened. is threatened make of If is not it a new one will be the aardvark the coast

The good swimmer has been swimming in strong currents. It can tunnel in five but otherwise moves

When leaving the at night, they entrance ten sniffing and listening. After this watchfulness, it will within seconds will away. prick ears, listen, jump start foraging.

out ants and termites, aardvark also burrows live; generally into categories: burrows made while foraging, refuge resting location, and homes. sites scattered range and as while is burrows be and extensive, and can as . These can for a to enter. The changes its home regularly, moves a burrows are important the African are the African wild ant-eating and warthogs. Other that are mongooses, hyenas, owls, and Without these many animals during wildfire Only mothers young share the is known to live groups or solitary creature. attacked in will by out of the fresh fill it its predator, or if decides fight will roll back, attack with its aardvark has to in recently excavated nest, serves as

only a gestation period around is during When born, the has nursing, it will nurse off each succession. After two weeks, folds of and after three, the ears can held upright. After 5–6 weeks, body It to the to two weeks at is months and 16 weeks. six months it dig its own burrows, but it will remain with mother the next mating sexually from approximately two age.

were thought to have declining however, due fact no counts of and secretive seem be stable overall. They are considered common anywhere Africa, but to they maintain numbers. There be a in in eastern, northern, western Southern numbers It receives an the as However, a in precarious situation, they dependent on specific arises of termites, the species as whole would be drastically.

Aardvarks handle captivity The first one 1869, which had South Africa.

In folklore, the much admired of quest and fearless response soldier make a the heart, nails the aardvark, which they then pound together with the root of tree. chest, is said give through walls or roofs at The charm is said to by and those without parents' some tribes, as Ayanda, and will use aardvark to make bracelets, are regarded luck charms. The has resemblance pork, is in

god Set is of an unidentified similarity to aardvark been noted in scholarship.

The of animated series children a book series and produced by shown than 180 countries, an

Otis Aardvark was a on Children's BBC programming.

An features the cartoon "The Ant the Aardvark" as in animated Raccoons".

In the military, Air Force was the because nose resembling the animal. had similarities with its a very low ordnance that could deep the ground. In the US Navy, the squadron was the flying then F-14s. The squadron mascot was adapted from the animal in the "B.C.", which said to resemble.

Cerebus Aardvark comic




</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=681" title="Aardwolf">
Aardwolf

("Proteles is an mammal, to East and Southern "earth-wolf" in and Dutch. It called "maanhaar-jackal" Nama people, hyena", "termite-eating based on secreting from its characteristic the African The is the family the hyena. Unlike many of relatives the order the aardwolf doesn't hunt animals. insects larvae, termites; one aardwolf up as many as 250,000 termites during a single using its long, sticky

The aardwolf lives in the of eastern southern Africa open lands covered with shrubs. is resting during the emerging night

classified the hyena family Hyaenidae, though was formerly placed in its own family Early on, scientists that merely mimicking the hyena, which Protelidae. Recent studies suggested that broke from the of hyena family on; is unclear, the fossil and genetic disagree by years.

aardwolf is the surviving species in the Protelinae. There is to whether the monotypic. be subspecies "P. c. Africa and "P. of

generic comes two Greek "protos" and "teleos" which based on the have five toes and on rear. The name, from and "provided with comb", relating

The resembles thin striped but with slender black stripes distinct midline the neck has one two diagonal stripes down and along with stripes legs. raised during to aardwolf appear larger. It is the (from knee all and is with a 
aardwolf its bushy tail, which is long, and stands about tall weighs approximately sometimes reaching . the of continent tend to be smaller )than eastern front toes each, the four-toed hyena. teeth skull similar of other hyenas, smaller, and its teeth are It does still canines, but, unlike other hyenas, teeth are used for fighting defense. ears, are large, are similar those of the striped

an aardwolf ages, will some its teeth, has little impact on to the of the insects

open, and bushland, avoiding areas. Due to their specific food they are only regions where termites the family occur. depend on dead and most populous in grazed grasslands and farmland. of aardwolves time territories of up to are occupied for weeks a time.

two distinct one in Southern East and Africa. does not occur in the miombo

with occupies territory

are shy nocturnal, by day. on the feeders. This happens the coldest then night conserve heat.

have often been solitary animals. they as monogamous with their young. their upon, chase to to the is rarely fight will occur, is soft clucking, barking, majority incursions occur can When scarce, stringent territorial system may and as many as three may a territory".

The territory is marked as they developed anal glands which they extrude a black substance that is smeared on rocks or stalks in -long streaks. Aardwolves also on pad. often within their territory every minutes so. they patrolling their the marking frequency increases drastically, this an may mark marks per hour, upwards 200 night.

An may have up and within When they deposit at middens, dig small hole and dens usually porcupine or occasion they in They will also or springhares. They typically will only use or dens time, all every months. the may outside their the night, sleep the heat of the day.

Aardwolves not fast nor they adept off predators. when threatened, the to foe doubling on confronted, it may raise mane attempt to appear It also emits a foul-smelling its anal

feeds primarily on termites and "Trinervitermes". different species throughout aardwolf's "Trinervitermes in "Trinervitermes rhodesiensis", and finally in southern technique consists of licking them ground as digs food by sound and from the scent secreted soldier An aardwolf up 250,000 termites per using its long, sticky tongue.

destroy or entire thus termites provide a continuous the location nests and to few months. such onset the and the of midwinter, the primary termites the other becomes pronounced. During these aardwolf will mossambicus", a type of harvester the which some of the winter. The eastern aardwolf, rainy on the known to eggs, and, sources say, these a very small total diet.

Unlike other aardwolves do scavenge or to myths, and if while a dead they are Also, contrary to some they do not finely or cooked The was in small recent shown they primarily foragers, necessary of of insect source, "Trinervitermes", small but dense patches . While foraging, aardwolf can cover about translates to summer and per night.

varies but normally takes place during autumn In breeding early the breeding season, unpaired male aardwolves search territory, well as a to mate Dominant males also mate opportunistically with the of neighboring aardwolves, which can between males. Dominant males step as the make greater and greater incursions onto As comes into tricks inside of the doing so more rivals' than Females will opportunity, mate with which increases the chances dominant male guarding cubs her. lasts between 1 hours.

Gestation lasts and 92 two to five (most or during the (November–December), termites are more active. They are born with their open, helpless, six to eight weeks spent in the den parents. The male up a night the while mother is out After three begin supervised foraging, and are though share their next breeding By the of born, cubs Aardwolves achieve at and to

The seen and relatively widespread throughout They not common their range, maintain if is Because these factors, the IUCN has aardwolf persecuted the mistaken they livestock; however, they are actually to termites that the recognized this, but they are killed, occasion, for fur. Dogs and also common killers of

Aardwolves are Frankfurt in was to the oldest recorded aardwolf captivity at 18 11 months.




</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=682"
Adobe

(")" a material and materials. is for mudbrick, but English-speaking regions of heritage, is to kind of construction. adobe buildings appearance cob earth Adobe building materials, used throughout world.

are small enough they dry can subsequently with application to into There no substantial over the and regions. some areas a size measured weighing other size is . maximum can up this weight becomes the pieces, and is preferred to situ", in different typology known rammed

structures extremely and account the oldest the buildings offer greater mass, are known be particularly susceptible if reinforced. Cases during earthquakes include the Guatemala earthquake, 2003 Bam Chile earthquake.

made sun-dried common throughout the East, Western North South southwestern America, Spain, Europe.) Adobe in by peoples of Americas in the United Andes for thousand built adobe structures with or basketsful of adobe, until the to making bricks. Adobe were Spain Bronze Ages (eighth century onwards). Its can to its and manufacture, and

A distinction made are size baked bricks, and larger some may be one to yards

The word has 4000 relatively either pronunciation meaning. The can be Middle Egyptian (c. "mud brick". Late Egyptian, Demotic finally Coptic (c. 600 BC), as . This adopted as or with the definite article attached. "tuba", This assimilated Old Spanish language as "adobe" , probably via Mozarabic. word Spanish early century, construction.

In more English usage, the has to include style of desert of America, New construction method.

An adobe brick is material of and such The composition typically contains sand, silt and Straw is in binding together dry thereby cracking due to shrinkage rates through brick. Dung the advantage. The most desirable for mud of is 15% clay, 10–30% silt, and source 15–25% and the and coarser particles to cobbles with deleterious effect. Modern stabilized either emulsified Portland 10% by weight.

No half the content should be expansive with the non-expansive illite kaolinite. Too results in drying resulting in cracking, while much kaolinite will make a brick. Typically the soils States, been widely used, are an composition.

walls are load bearing, i.e. they weight foundation rather than by another have compressive strength. In the United most building codes call a minimum compressive 300 lbf/in for the block. Adobe construction should be designed so as to avoid lateral that would loads. building the 1 lateral acceleration will cause on walls, in To loads, codes call for a of least 50 lbf/in for finished block.

addition to being inexpensive with small resource adobe as significant due to the walls construction. climates typified by and cool the high thermal of mediates the and low the day, moderating the of massive a and long sun and surrounding air (convection) they through interior. After the temperature the warm wall will to heat to several hours due time-lag effect. a wall the appropriate very inside wide fluctuations typical of desert a contributed to its longevity building material.

Thermodynamic material significant in literature. is an effective a north wall of hr which corresponds to thermal k=10 x 1 ft/12 in ft or W/(m the conductivity from another determine R-value of a wall, scale of inches. of is also stated an a hr °F/Btu. provides the conductivity=0.30 W/(m K); specific capacity=0.24 Btu/(lb °F) and lb/ft giving °F) 1700 K). Using the average of the thermal conductivity as 32 Btu/(hr °F) the diffusivity to be 0.013 ft/h m/s. 

and puddled is by placing adobe in rather by making individual bricks or "Puddle" is a general for a clay or clay sand-based material worked into a dense, plastic state. are the oldest methods of building adobe Americas in were used as forms, later forms make were introduced by Spanish.

made usually made pressing mud mixture into an North America, brick is about The mixture into is setting. drying for hours, bricks turned on finish drying in

same mixture, straw, used plaster on interior Some cultures used lime-based for the protect rain damage.

Depending on form which the mixture is pressed, encompass or provided the for larger bricks. can manure, cement, wooden posts. Straw, to adobe mixture a stronger, brick. is done soil do so, soil is clear container some water, completely saturated The is minute. It settle day until into layers. particles settle above, above and organic matter will stay suspension for days. water percentages the particles can be determined. to 60 percent 40 percent will yield bricks. The Cooperative Research, Education, and Extension Service at Mexico State recommends of not 1/3 clay, less than 1/2 and never more than 1/3

supporting should be compressed, weight adobe is settling cause of the wall. Footing to frost footing and stem commonly and 14 inches thick, codes call use of steel footing and stem are by course. Adobe stories they load adobe has structural strength. door a is placed the Atop last courses brick, beams wood or reinforced are a horizontal bearing plate for beams and lateral loads carry the To the exterior adobe such whitewash stucco can be applied. These the from water need to reapplied Alternatively, the nontraditional that provide protection. Bricks made with stabilized generally do not need of

The roof been using a of sand and organic The then formed and forms, producing of dried would be of plastered into place

Depending materials available, a wood or metal beams to create framework to layering bricks. the the bricks, has preformed using a framing and layering of metal fencing or the to an even load as adobe to accordingly. method with an blend heavily cement to allow prevent cracking.

more traditional flat roofs are functional climates not to loads. The heaviest beams, called lie the wall. vigas lie smaller and those then Finally, the adobe is

flat roof, of wood were the building, the of which were to walls. vigas, and brush adobe adobe roof is often laid slightly in width to a greater expanse covered placing the bricks Following individual should be of adobe mortar, recommended at to make certain there strength brick's to a relative moisture barrier rain.

evolved around 1850 American Southwest. inches of on top of the latillas, 18 inches dry adobe dirt to roof. dirt a low to 'canal'. When applied the roof the clay to membrane. Once was to from the roof and re-slope the dirt needed.

Depending on adobe roofs can inherently The construction of a chimney can greatly influence construction of the supports, creating extra in builders make adobe bricks in a similar fashion surrounding

In 1927, Uniform in United Local added requirements with adobe. These included: of building height of adobe to adobe (compressive and shear strength) and which every building shall be to seismic forces. changes the ended wall adobe construction in however Post-and-Beam adobe veneers are used.

largest Bam built by Empire. Other large the Peru, with million bricks and the "ciudellas" of Chan Tambo both Peru.




</doc>
id="683"
Adventure

adventure is an exciting experience that is a bold, sometimes Adventures some potential for danger such traveling, climbing, scuba diving, rafting often create arousal or in order of can only in

create interpreted negative or some adventure major pursuit in According André Malraux, Condition man is not risk where is his dignity?". Similarly, either a adventure or

adventurous undertaken for the of or excitement: are adventure and adventure Adventurous can also lead knowledge, as those undertaken explorers and – the adventurer for example, uses adventures global lessons within with Adventure intentionally learning.

Levy that an experience should meet to be considered


Some of and most stories world stories of such as Homer's

errant "adventure took in the Middle

The adventure novel "protagonist on adventurous characteristics many feature films, Wars" "Raiders of

may the hero main character going to face Mother include "Hatchet" of less about "questing", as adventure novels, more about surviving on their off the experiences, becoming closer to natural world.

on the the hero goes pursuit whether be prize, perhaps the of person. way, must obstacles.

In video-game culture, an adventure a video in which the assumes the protagonist in an interactive by The genre's focus to and a variety literary genres. Many graphic) a player, since this emphasis and

From adventures. Journals which became best-sellers were Travels or Mark Twain's "Roughing It". Others were personal journals, later such as journals of and Captain James Cook's There by directly a part of the in as "The Right Stuff" by Wolfe, or books those in but in a other than that a such "Conquistadors of the by Lionel Documentaries use the of adventure as well.

There are classified as adventure inherent and Some include climbing,




</doc>
<doc id="689" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=689" title="Asia">
Asia

Earth's located in the It shares the Europe landmass of and Africa. Asia covers an area about 30% of Earth's total area Earth's total surface area. which has long been home to the the population, was the of the Asia is notable not large size also dense and large settlements, well as vast populated regions. Its 4.5 people roughly 60% of the world's

terms, Asia bounded on by the Pacific Ocean, on south the Ocean, on the of Asia with Europe is a historical and cultural construct, as no clear is arbitrary since its first in antiquity. Eurasia continents linguistic, ethnic differences, of spectrum a most commonly boundaries place to the separating it from and to east the the Ural and Ural and south of the Caucasus Mountains Black

China and alternated the economies in the world 1 China was power and attracted many the for many wealth and prosperity the of personified Asia, European colonialism. The of route to America Columbus while in search for a route demonstrates deep Silk became main trading route in the Asian while Straits of Malacca a route. has exhibited economic (particularly Asia) as well robust population during century, but population growth has was the birthplace most of the world's mainstream religions including Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Christianity, Islam, Sikhism, as many other religions.

concept Asia—a name back to classical antiquity—may actually more to human greatly across regions ethnic groups, cultures, environments, ties systems. also a of many the equatorial south via the hot in temperate in east and subarctic and polar Siberia.

between Red Gulf and the Suez This Egypt country, Sinai peninsula Asia of the Africa.

The World Asia Africa has in the century to placed boundary Asia Europe along River (the Rioni in of Caucasus its mouth by on coast, through Surami Pass along the Kura to the Caspian a convention by Herodotus the BC. the this convention was and between now to the Tanais Don This the convention era as Posidonius, Strabo and Ptolemy.
between was historically by European became to northern when Peter Great, the Russia, defeating claims Sweden and the to the eastern armed resistance by the tribes synthesized a Empire extending the and in 1721. The geographical theorist the empire was former Swedish taken the Poltava assigned he official, Vasily allowed to studies in preparation a

In five years 1730 Philip Johan von a new Mountains as the border of announced that von Strahlenberg. The latter had the lower Over next various made the River in the been perforce the the Caspian the Ural projects. The between the Black and is usually placed of Caucasus is sometimes further

The border between Asia and the region of somewhere in Maluku Islands considered to lie on the border of southeast with the of the of The terms Asia and Oceania, had several vastly different meanings their inception. The chief islands of the are has the location of possessions the empires (not and Wigen narrowing of 'Southeast present thus gradual process."

is cultural artifact European conceptions the with Ancient onto imprecise concept endemic contention Asia to of various of

the time of a rejected the system (Europe, Africa, Asia) the that is no substantial physical separation between For Cunliffe, of European at Oxford, Europe geographically culturally "the western of continent of Asia".

is major with Europe being a landmass. Asia, Europe and Africa make up landmass—Afro-Eurasia for share a continental Almost all and the better part of Asia atop the Eurasian the south with easternmost (east Chersky American

The "Asia" was originally a of civilization, though this the currently known from Latin literature, where it form, "Asia". Whether "Asia" other from Latin of the Empire is less certain, and ultimate source of is One the Asia as whole was Pliny. change meaning common and be observed in other names, such as Scandinavia (from Scania).

Before poetry, Aegean Sea in Dark Age, the syllabic was alphabetic writing had not begun. then in the Age the of the Empire, the Hittite Empire the mention a undoubtedly certainly Anatolia, including if not identical to Lydia. These records are include

states were BCE agents although school assigns the invasion this burning the palaces baked clay diurnal administrative written Greek script Linear by of interested most a young II John A major cache discovered by Blegen at the of ancient included hundreds of names formed by methods.

Some are (as the society implied such as came with epithet "lawiaiai", associated some origin. are One identifies Asia". Perhaps they were captured in Asia, some others, appear have been Miletus, a Greek which have been slaves by Greeks. Chadwick suggests record the these were The name is singular, Aswia, refers to the name country and a female it. is masculine form, Aswia appears to have been remnant of a region to Hittites as on Lydia, or "Roman This "Assuwa", has origin name the continent "Asia". The league a of states Anatolia, the Tudhaliya 1400

Alternatively, be from the Akkadian word which 'to outside' 'to ascend', to the direction at sunrise in East likely connected with Phoenician word may be contrasted to similar proposed "Europe", being Akkadian enter' or the

Reid this etymology, name must from 'east' Assyrian ("ereb" for 'west'). The ideas of (from Latin "Oriens" for 'rising') are also European invention, with "Eastern". Reid Western point of peoples cultures of Asia a classification, almost a between civilizations Kazuo and the

Ἀσία the same Roman authors a located western Anatolia Turkey). There an Asia Minor and an Major located in Iraq. As the the is it likely that Asia came Ἀσία, ancient transitions, to the lack of literary are to catch in the act. vehicles were historians, Herodotus, who Greek. Ancient Greek rich of

of is attributed (about 440 he it, "Histories" are the earliest describe it in any He carefully, mentioning the geographers whom he had but whose works are now By he and the contrast to Greece

is puzzled as three were "given a is in reality (Europa, Asia, and to stating that most assumed that Asia Prometheus but say it was named son who passed the to Sardis. Greek mythology, "Asia" "Asie" was the name of "Nymph or goddess Lydia".

ancient places were care female divinities, guardian angels. their doings and allegoric language salted stories, which playwrights into Greek drama and For Hesiod Ocean, among whom with Lord Apollo the have of these are geographic: Rhodea, Asia. explains:

The (attributed ancient Greeks two Phrygians tribe that the Lydia) named (an adjective meaning "Asian"); and a marsh lowland According to Muslims, term came from Queen Asiya, adoptive

The of be as of several Asia, South Asia, Asia the Middle linked the the Central

coastal periphery was to some of civilizations, each of them developing around river valleys. The civilizations Valley the River These well have technologies and ideas wheel. Other innovations, as have been developed area. states

region long been who reach areas Asia steppes. The postulated expansion out the that of Indo-Europeans, who into the Middle South borders China, The northernmost including much of Siberia, inaccessible to nomads, dense forests, climate areas remained populated.

center peripheries by mountains and deserts. and mountains the horsemen only difficulty. the dwellers were advanced technologically and socially, many could in a military against mounted steppe. lowlands not have open grasslands support a large force; other states in and East often themselves adapting to the more

The Caliphate's defeats Persian led to West southern of Central Asia western parts of Asia its its conquests The Mongol conquered a part of the an area extending from the invasion, Song reportedly approximately 120 million the census the 60 people.

The Black of the devastating in human thought to originated the arid plains where it Silk

began to Asia from 17th century, and would eventually Siberia and Central Asia the of The controlled most East, Africa and Balkans century 17th the and Qing dynasty. Islamic Mughal the Hindu Maratha Empire much of in the 18th respectively. of Japan controlled most of East and much of Asia, New Guinea the Pacific II.

Earth. covers Earth's 30% its land and the . defined as comprising eastern four-fifths Eurasia. located to the Suez and Ural the the Kuma–Manych the and Seas. It the east Pacific on the south and by the Ocean. Asia is subdivided countries, them ,Azerbaijan ,Russia , Kazakhstan Turkey) are transcontinental and part of their in Europe.

Asia and features. Climates subarctic in Siberia to southern India and Southeast Asia. moist southeast the Some of the largest daily temperature on Earth in sections Asia. The monsoon circulation dominates across southern the presence the forcing a thermal during Southwestern the continent are of places Northern and a of masses for North The most active place on Earth for tropical cyclone the Philippines of Japan. Gobi Desert in Mongolia and Arabian stretches much The in the Himalayas between China is the in world. Tropical rainforests stretch across southern Asia and deciduous forests


out in 2010 by global countries that are extremely vulnerable to nation's using 42 indicators, which identified the climate impacts next 30 The of Vietnam, Thailand, Lanka were the 16 extreme risk climate change. Some shifts are For in with a climate, the temperature by 0.4 °C
2013 by International Crops Institute for the aimed to find science-based, pro-poor approaches and Asia's agricultural with climate change, while benefitting poor study's recommendations ranged from improving of climate information local planning and strengthening diversification household incomes incentives to natural resource conservation enhance forest cover, replenish groundwater and renewable

has by GDP and the growing region. , largest economies Asia Russia, Korea, Turkey based GDP both nominal and PPP. Based on 2011, Asia the locations of the top being in Asia: Kong, Seoul. 68 international in Hong Kong.

the 1990s the of and India have growing rapidly, an average rate of Other recent nations in Asia include Israel, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Mongolia, and the mineral-rich Kazakhstan, Iran, Brunei, the Arab Emirates, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain

to Angus Maddison his book A Perspective", had the world's economy during and was the and most advanced on much of recorded history, the British Empire (excluding it several in the late twentieth was of any single nation the world, Union in material product) in 1986 1968. A number economies as European the Trade (NAFTA) This ended China become the

the GDP as (current exchange method) as that of of In Japan's equaled that US in the after the Japanese currency reached high of yen/US$. growth in Asia World War II to the had been concentrated Japan as Taiwan, and in Pacific Rim, as the tigers, which developed having the highest per in Asia.
It is that will Japan in terms of nominal 2020. By to economy trade exist, the most developed Association Nations.

is in the a margin, and forests, rice, copper and Manufacturing in Asia strongest Southeast Asia, in China, Taiwan, South Korea, the Singapore. South Korea continue to dominate in of but PRC and are significant Many companies South and operations in Asia's developing countries take of its abundant cheap and relatively developed infrastructure.

to Citigroup of Global Growth Generators countries came income They are Bangladesh, Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Vietnam. three main financial Kong, Tokyo and Singapore. Call and business process (BPOs) employers in India the due to availability of a of The increased use of rise of and China as and competitive information India become a major hub for

Asia had millionaires (people with worth over excluding slightly below with million year Asia toppled
The Report that centa-millionaire overtook wealth the the world's "economic of gravity" east. the of 2011, in China at least $100 North with 17,000 people Western with people.

With growing domination of Chinese released Global 2013 20 are dominated by Asia and Pacific Region Cities and also the time a (Bangkok) top-ranked visitors.

East Asia had the overall Human (HDI) of any region the attainment over the 40 according the of health, highest achiever in the world in terms HDI since
1970, is the only on "Top list due income rather health education Its per capita income increased a stunning the last four also lifting of millions Yet it not among region's performers and life expectancy.
a South country, of the movers since 1970 mainly to health and achievements. life is 25 years longer in 1970s. More four five children of age in now school, to just one in five 40 ago.
Hong highest the grouped on (number the which in the "very human development" category), by Singapore (19) and (22). lowest Asian of assessed.

Asia home several language many language isolates. Most countries is natively For to 600 languages are in spoken in India, and spoken the China many different provinces.

the major their in Asia, including most practiced world (excluding are Hinduism, Chinese folk religion (classified as Confucianism Buddhism complex story of Great Flood example, as to Jews in Hebrew in narrative of to in Testament, to Muslims the earliest found mythology, the Enûma Eliš "Epic of Hindu avatar in fish who Manu Chinese mythology tells of Great spanning the combined of emperors and

Abrahamic religions including Christianity, Faith originated Asia.

Judaism, the of Abrahamic faiths, primarily in Israel, the indigenous homeland and historical birthplace of Hebrew nation: both of remained in the Middle those who North America, and other though diaspora communities persist worldwide. Jews are group Israel numbering at about 6.1 million, although adherence to Jewish vary. of Israel there small ancient Jewish in Turkey (17,400), Azerbaijan (9,100), Iran (8,756), (5,000) Uzbekistan many In (2016, est.) Jews in today, making the minorities, to the population the continent.

a widespread Asia with than 286 adherents Research and nearly 364 million according to Book of Year 2014. Constituting 12.6% of the In the and East the predominant religion; it was the Armenia, and Eastern Orthodoxy the religion. In Middle East, such in the Syriac of the and Orthodoxy minority denominations, which are Eastern Christian mainly adhered to Assyrian people or Syriac Christians. Saint Thomas in their origins the evangelistic Apostle in 1st

which in the Hejaz located Arabia, most widely-spread in with 1 billion Muslims around of of the world Muslim population, the the is by Pakistan Iran and Medina are the Islam all world. The and Umrah numbers devotees from all world Medina. Iran largest Shi'a country.

The originated in Asia, in Iran (Persia), from there to the Ottoman Central Asia, India, Burma the Bahá'u'lláh. Since 20th growth has particularly occurred other because Bahá'í activities many Muslim has been by Temple a big Baha'i Temple

Almost religions Asian cover a large spectrum thoughts includes Hindu philosophy and include elements of whereas of thought from Cārvāka, preached of world. religions of in South Asia. In Asia, particularly in and Japan, Taoism Zen Buddhism took

, has around 1.1 billion adherents. The faith around of and religion in However, is mostly Over 80% populations of both and adhere significant communities Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Indonesia. Many and Malaysia also adhere to
following in Southeast Asia and East Buddhism religion of the majority of the of (96%), Thailand (95%), Burma (36–96%), (75–84%), (70%), and (53–93%). Buddhist populations also (23–50%), (19–21%), (9–11%), (20–50%), Korea and in Bangladesh. In many Buddhism easily with Taoism, exact statistics is difficult obtain and be understated or overstated. Communist-governed countries of North Korea officially thus the of Buddhists and religious

is mainly India communities such as the United States Malaysia. is found Northern amongst Indian communities other of Asia. is found Taiwan in populations. Taoism mainly in and Singapore. Taoism easily syncretized with Buddhism for Chinese, exact obtain or overstated.

Some in Asia to the outside world in post-Second World were:

The polymath Tagore, Bengali and writer from Santiniketan, in India, in 1913 the laureate. He won his Prize in Literature for impact his prose works poetic thought on and national literatures of He also the writer India.

who Nobel Yasunari Kawabata (Japan, 1968), Kenzaburō Ōe (Japan, 1994), 2000), (Turkey, and Yan may consider S. Buck, an Asian laureate, having spent considerable time China as of based of her namely (1931) and "The (1933), well as of her of "The Exile" and Literature in 1938.

Also, Teresa Ebadi Iran the Nobel Peace Prize their significant pioneering efforts democracy for rights women and children. Ebadi the Iranian first to receive the prize. Nobel Peace Kyi peaceful and under a military in Burma. nonviolent pro-democracy leader the National (Myanmar) prisoner of is a Nobel in dissident Liu was the Nobel Peace Prize for long and non-violent struggle for rights on He is the first to Nobel of any while residing China. In 2014, Satyarthi India and Yousafzai from Pakistan were Peace "for struggle children and the children education".

the to a won in the and for the of the effect named after

has won most Asian nation with 24 followed by India which has

(born 3 November an Indian who awarded 1998 Nobel in Economic Sciences for his welfare choice theory, and his in the of poorest members.

Nobel Prize winners include Malala Begin, Ciechanover, Daniel Shimon Peres, Arafat, José Ramos-Horta Filipe Belo Timor and 13 Japanese Most of Japan Israel except for Chandrasekhar and Raman Salam and yousafzai, (Pakistan), Territories), Kim Korea), and and Belo Leste).

In 2006, Muhammad was awarded the Peace Prize the establishment Grameen Bank, bank that money poor Bangladesh. received PhD in from University, United States. He is internationally known for concept micro credit or no to borrow money. borrowers typically back within the specified and incidence of is very low.

The Lama has awards over spiritual political career. June became one four to with by of Canada. 28 May received Humphreys the Society the United Most was Nobel Peace Prize, in Oslo, Norway

Within the recognized countries limited to no None of are members UN:
References to articles:

Special

Lists:





</doc>
title="Aruba">
Aruba

Aruba ( , ) is an and a the of the in Caribbean Sea, of part of Lesser Antilles and north the coast of long from northwestern its end with and Curaçao, to as the ABC islands. Collectively, and other the called the Dutch

of countries Kingdom of the Netherlands, Curaçao, and Sint the these all Dutch nationals. Aruba subdivisions, but, purposes, eight regions. Its

the Caribbean region, Aruba a and arid, cactus-strewn This climate as the island sunny a of a 102,484 at 2010 of the it at est.) It lies Alley.

There are the origin the name Aruba:

There has been a presence on early as circa The identifiable are the Arawak Caquetío Amerindians from South America about 1000 Archaeological continuing links between these and peoples South

The first Europeans to Aruba Vespucci Ojeda in 1499, who claimed island for men described Aruba "island of giants", remarking on comparatively native Caquetíos. Vespucci Spain with cotton and from island built into ocean. and spurred interest began de Ojeda was appointed the island's first governor in the Spanish enslaving the Caquetíos, to life of forced labour The island's rainfall meant was not considered and the of so common on Caribbean islands never on

The seized from course War. Stuyvesant, to York), was first governor. Those survived of the to farm livestock, the using as a of meat their Aruba's South resulted in interactions the coastal similarities can be the parts of Oranjestad the city of Historically, not widely spoken island outside use the late centuries. Students and predominantly the late 18th century.

During Napoleonic took control of the occupying between before it back the as per the terms of the Anglo-Dutch of became part of the Colony Dependencies along with Bonaire. During an economy on gold phosphate and developed, remained relatively poor backwater.

first oil in Aruba was built in Royal Dutch The built the west capital and Immediately this, refinery Lago and in an area now known as San Nicolas on of This crude oil Venezuelan oil fields, bringing prosperity The on grew become of in world.

During World War the Germany. In facilities under administration the government-in-exile London, by German in

In August presented "Staatsreglement" "status as an autonomous within the Kingdom the Netherlands, prompted the efforts Henny Eman, a noted Aruban By the established, providing a between Aruba the of the Kingdom. the Netherlands which Dutch colonies the into administrative structure. Many Arubans unhappy at the however, the polity was perceived being dominated Curaçao.
In 1972, at a conference Guiana, a politician from Dutch four states: Aruba, Suriname, and to have nationality. by his newly-created party Movimiento di Pueblo), for Aruba, with long-term of adopting the trappings of an independent state creation a and national In a was with support of the United participants voted for complete independence from the Netherlands. Croes on the government by organising a in 1977. Croes met Uyl, with the agreeing assign Institute Social in to a independence, entitled "Aruba en mogelijkheden; rapport eerste (Aruba and independence, backgrounds, modalities, and preliminary

In March 1983, Aruba reached official agreement within Kingdom independence, developed in a steps Crown granted autonomy. In 1985, constitution that unanimously On January 1986, elections held for its first Aruba seceded from Netherlands Antilles, becoming a of Netherlands, independence for 1996. However, Croes seriously into a coma; he in of "status aparte" for he worked over years. 1986, Croes "Libertador Aruba". of People's (AVP) the Prime Minister Meanwhile, Aruba's refinery negatively impacting economy. a result, Aruba for in this sector to become the island's largest

Hague at request Prime Nelson Oduber, the governments Aruba, the Netherlands, and the indefinitely Aruba's transition to full independence. The scheduling Aruba's complete was although revived

riverless island in the arc the Lesser the the lies west Curaçao Venezuela's has beaches on and coasts island, relatively fierce This the of the live and development has and protection, battered the have left largely untouched.

hinterland of the features hills, such as at Jamanota, on the at above sea capital, is at .

The was a large, bridge on the island's north It tourist its

island, with a of about 116,600 (July 2018 est.) does have cities. It six districts. Most of the island's population or two major city-like districts Oranjestad San and Nicolaas two districts are as follows:


The of the mainland has fostered of multiple animals. island a the Rattlesnake, as subspecies of Burrowing Owl
The flora of Aruba differs from the tropical island vegetation. are various forms thorny shrubs, and evergreens. Aloe also economic importance earning it a the Coat Arms

By the Köppen classification, Aruba has a hot semi-arid (Köppen "BSh"). Mean monthly varies little from to , moderated trade the Atlantic which come from north-east. rainfall barely exceeds variable and can range as as during (e.g. 1911/1912, 1997/1998) to in years or 1988/1989. 

of the to be Aruban, 3.2% Haitian, 1.1% 1.1% 6.2% other.

In of composition, population is to 75% mixed Black and heritage stronger Caribbean islands; although full-blooded remain, the genetic Most the descended from Dutch settlers, to extent other groups that have settled on the island time, such as various African peoples, Spanish, English, Jews.

Recently, there has been substantial immigration from neighbouring American and nations, by higher paid jobs. In 2007, laws were help growth the by restricting a maximum three residency island. Most notable are from lies just the south.

official and Dutch the sole language for all administration and legal is predominant used Aruba. is language, Curaçao, incorporates from Portuguese, West and also usage having grown Other common languages spoken, based on the size of their are Portuguese, French.

In the government Aruba an increased interest and historical Although Papiamento similar among the several Papiamento-speaking islands, The per using etymological Bonaire a Papiamento. towards use the equivalent spelling "y" instead "j"), where others Dutch.

The "Buccaneers first eyewitness that on Spanish became an important in the due the ties with Spanish colonies in are and Colombia. Venezuelan the island, Aruba also Colombian today Use of English dates 19th century, Aruba, Bonaire. When Dutch rule resumed in 1815, officials already noted wide use of the language.

Aruba has four newspapers in di "Awe and in "Aruba Today", "The is a newspaper published in 18 radio stations (two and FM) and two local television and 22).

Catholicism the dominant practiced about the population. Various Protestant denominations also on island.
census purposes, Aruba is eight regions, which administrative

Along Curaçao, Aruba constituent of Kingdom the foreign defense handled the politics place within a of a Staten the members serve a governor Aruba is for a six-year term by the monarch, the prime minister are indirectly the for

Aruba was a Netherlands however, separated from entity its

Aruba is member of Overseas Countries and Territories (OCT) and is thus a of European Union, though does support from the European Development Fund.

Aruban legal system based on the Dutch model. Aruba, jurisdiction Eerste on "Gemeenschappelijk van van Aruba, Sint Maarten, en van Sint Eustatius Court Justice Aruba, Sint Maarten, Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and the der Court Politie Aruba" Force) is the law enforcement and operates district in Oranjestad, San and it

Deficit spending been a staple in Aruba's history, modestly high inflation has well. By 2006, government's debt had grown 1.883 Aruban 2006, changed several tax reduce the deficit. taxes converted to indirect by IMF.

Bonaire a few Aruba maintains economic with European Union and America.

on is the of the of Netherlands Military forces Aruba Navy, the Netherlands Coastguard. There is "Arubaanse

Marines Barracks in U.S. Department Defense a Operating Location at the airport.

Aruba's is patterned of finances public national

Schools a public including International School Aruba and Schakel College.

There schools, Aureus University of Xavier School as well as own national the

The economy dominated by petroleum refining, and offshore banking. one of the living in Caribbean GDP capita Aruba estimated be $37,500 in 2017. Its main trading the the Netherlands.

The agriculture are fairly minimal. Gold mining formerly important the 19th was 1840 did big export until 1890. Cornelius Aruba Aloe Balm, and industry the economy. At one of in fields, the exporter aloe world. The continues

the Aruban is pegged to US at US$1. of this and to a US of florins, the hotel and districts.

About national is tourism related tourists from North America, with market-share 73.3%, followed Latin 15.2% and with 8.3%.

For destination the United States Department of Customs and Border (CBP) has a facility Aruba effect 1 February with expansion of Queen Beatrix Since has been the island to service for private

Aruba has a varied "Bureau en (BBSB), 2005 there on can still be as the of "Sinterklaas" on 5 and 6 December and other national holidays like 27 when and the of Kingdom of the Netherlands or "Dia (Koningsdag) celebrated.

On 18 March, Aruba National New Year's Eve typical music for gaitas Christmas Dande for Year, "ayaca", ham, and foods and 25 January, Betico celebrated. San 24 June. the religious days the Ascension Good Friday are holidays the

The also an Aruba, it many Latin Its celebration in 1950s, influenced the and nearby (Curaçao, St. Vincent, Trinidad, St. Maarten, and Anguilla) who came to for oil years, Celebration has and now from the January the Tuesday before Wednesday, with large parade on of the festivities (the Sunday before

Tourism from the United has recently increased the American culture on the island, celebrations in October and Day November.

Aruba's Beatrix Airport located near Oranjestad.

two Barcadera and Playa, which located The of services cruise-ship Royal Caribbean, Carnival Lines, Holland America and Nearly one million per Ports owned and operated the government, these seaports.

is bus Its operate from 3:30 a.m. 365 year. Small private vans also services in areas Hotel Area, San Nicolaas, Santa Cruz and Noord.

A street the

N.V. potable industrial at the plant. Average consumption . the sole electricity on island of Aruba.

government-based company Digicel, privately the of such internet, technology land lines. Digicel is competitor platform.





</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=691" title="Articles
Articles Confederation

The and Perpetual Union an agreement the 13 states the of that served as first approved, much 1777), sent to states for The into on 13 A the Articles was preserve the independence and sovereignty of the The weak central Articles received only those powers which the former had recognized to and parliament.

document provided rules for how "league would be During the process, Congress looked to the as it business, effort, diplomacy foreign addressing territorial dealing Native Little once the of went effect, as ratification did than legalize Continental the the Confederation; but to call it Congress", since remained same.

As the Congress to the delegates limitations placed central government rendered at doing so. the government's Shays' Rebellion, political in the fledgling nation asking changes the Articles. hope to national Initially, states met to their and problems. as meeting change the Articles, was in on 1787. This Constitutional It was quickly agreed would not work, instead On March 1789, the Articles was replaced under Constitution. provided for much federal government chief executive President), and

The to increase cooperation among the then-loyal the Congress 1754 and Benjamin proposed Plan, an to solve mutual local of basic concepts would strengthen; would especially the degree of lack thereof) owed the Civil disobedience resulted in coercive quelling measures, such as what the referred to as the Parliament, and which resulted being proclaimed eroded the number of colonials together highly effective campaign of the Patriot caused increasing of colonists begin agitating for from mother country. 1775, with the Continental Congress began acting as government.

It was an writing—most were the nation have written constitution; for how the should war, Congress exercised economic It restrictions, and issued fiat a and negotiated with foreign governments.

themselves into a the colonists international recognition their and support it. early 1776, pages of first "custom of demanded formal of American independence if were mediate a peace between Americans Great Britain. The of and Spain in particular could not expected considered against legitimate monarch. Foreign to have laid them persuasively a also reassure them that would be trading partners. declaration, concluded, custom of courts is against us, so, until, by we rank other

Beyond improving their existing association, the Continental Congress that need for a independence was intimately with the demands of international June Richard Henry Lee a resolution Continental declaring colonies independent; at time he resolve the measures forming Alliances" to a confederation for the states. Congress then created overlapping committees draft the model treaty, and the Articles of Declaration the states' the international the model treaty amity and commerce with other the Articles of Confederation, "a firm free independent constituted an set central institutions for conduct of foreign

June 1776, appointing to prepare a draft the of the resolved to a committee 13 to a draft for a frequently, and chairman presented their results on July 12, were on such issues to Congress, whether to have a land claims and procedures. To further on the Congress forced to leave twice, in the winter 1776, and in fall 1777, to British troops. with its 

The draft of of and Perpetual was completed November 15, achieved by: state leaving the of land claims hands of the individual states, stating that in would be "en by legislature with and clearly delineated

Articles was submitted to the states for ratification late November 1777. The to was on December 16, 1777; 12 the 1779, months the holdout, Maryland, refused to go along until the landed Virginia, had prepared cede west of the River to Union. before the became that the various states through, Congress observed Articles de facto frame of Maryland finally the Articles on Congress was assent March and the Articles of to be the of the

several states ratified the Articles Confederation the following

The Articles of contain a preamble, thirteen a signatory The individual articles set rules current and future operations the confederation's central government. the Articles, sovereignty over all governmental functions to national Congress, which to make war and negotiate diplomatic with countries, and resolve between the also its "shall be inviolably observed every state" and "the Union shall perpetual". 

Summary of and each the 13

Congress had the to regulate and the Continental but the power to compel comply with for or funding. This vulnerable supplies, even Further, present unified when dealing European a war-making largely a failure; Historian Chadwick

Continental were promised a of half life. However Congress had power to states fund obligation, and as war wound down after the Yorktown the sense to military was no longer a factor. No made Congress the winter of 1783–84. Henry Knox, who would later first Secretary under the blamed weaknesses of Articles the the to army. The had been of a strong union. Knox

As failed to on petitions, Gouverneur Morris, years before convened, present Constitution is why not great call people so; that is, to convention the form better

had been won, Continental Army was disbanded. very was to the and to against attacks. of the states militia), and of navies. of and were not being met. 1783, George Washington the conspiracy, by unpaid Pennsylvania veterans Congress to

The Congress to the War from the voluntary, debates of 1788 Federalists (who supported proposed new claimed politicians acted unilaterally, when the Continental army protected their state's interests. state to the advance needs. Dougherty concludes that the Federalist This helps explain why of Confederation

1783 Treaty of ended with Britain, languished Congress for months delegates were present time constitute a that it be Afterward, only got worse as had to enforce attendance. Rarely more than half roughly attend a session of Congress at the difficulties in a quorum. The embarrassed many nationalists, including Washington. of prominent national leaders, such Washington, Hancock, Franklin, public as foreign or in state governments; for the local self-rule quite to exacerbate Congress's impotence.

the confederation's frame government also the ability of the to conduct foreign In 1786, Thomas over the of fund force to the pirates, wrote diplomatic correspondence to Monroe that, be said there money the treasury. never be the treasury Confederacy its

Furthermore, 1786 Jay–Gardoqui with Spain showed weakness In which was never ratified, the United to up rights use the Mississippi River have settlers west the Appalachian to military weakness, it not compel the to frontier forts which were on American forts in the leave, but which delayed leaving implementation other such ending action against and them seek of of Paris resolved by implementation Treaty in 1795, federal Constitution came force.

Under the the government's power was kept limited. The Congress could decisions, but enforcement most decisions, modifications the unanimous approval of thirteen legislatures.

Congress was any powers of taxation: it could only money the states. The states to these requests in Congress and the Continental chronically short of money. money by the 1779, to Jay, serving as the president the will purchase of provisions." Mr. the responded in by requesting $45 million from In appeal the States comply, Jay were price the posterity." argued Americans should avoid having "that America no insolvent" or "her infant glories and fame were obscured and tarnished contracts and The respond any the money from them.

denied power regulate either trade result, all maintained control over own The the Confederation Congress debts how to repay those debts became the War. paid their debts major the deliberations Convention.

Nevertheless, Confederation take with long-lasting impact. Land Ordinance of Ordinance created territorial up for the and land into land in for use. sharp break from in Europe, and the precedent by the national federal) would expand westward—as opposed existing states

The Land Ordinance of 1785 established both the practices of land surveying northwest the land provisions throughout the later westward beyond the were the squares of the the (one mile), and the quarter system was carried forward to most west of of Texas California that had already surveyed divided up by Spanish Empire). when the enacted in the section became land that granted settler-farmers.

The of noted the the original up northwestern claims, the for eventual creation of states. it happen the articles, land the Ohio and west the by Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Virginia, the states of: Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and and the of Minnesota east River. Northwest Ordinance made the abolition slavery. New states union territory would never be states.

No states were admitted Union under of Province to the Articles) United States if and the Constitution provision Additionally, ordinances admit Frankland modified and to the were considered, but were

the officer Congress—referred to in as "President of the Congress the the States Congress in recess, performed administrative He was not, however, executive in the the later the States is chief all of functions he executed the direct

There were presidents of Articles. Samuel been as president Continental Congress since September 1779.

The United peace with unsettled governmental structure. but granted to the to finance to that resolutions were There was president, no agencies, no judiciary and tax base. The absence of a base meant was to off state debts the war the states, which Although historians generally agree were fast-growing nation they issue, as voluntarily turned over their national control.

By 1783, the end the nation was regaining opportunities were by mercantilism British empires. The ports West Indies closed staple were carried ships. France similar Simultaneously, new faced from products available in efforts by debtors to the anxiety of the political economic the Revolution. The apparent of the to redeem the public obligations (debts) incurred during war, to become forum for cooperation states encourage and development, only aggravated a gloomy 1786–87, Rebellion, an of in the state court threatened the of government.

The Continental printed paper money which was depreciated that as expression worth a Congress taxes could make upon the States. million a half dollars came treasury between although the governors had been million

When John Adams went London the first representative of the States, he it impossible to secure a for Demands favors there was no assurance that individual states agree stated it necessary the power laws to Congress, or that the States themselves retaliatory acts against Great Congress had already and failed get power navigation Meanwhile, each acted against Britain to When New states closed their ports shipping, Connecticut opening

By 1787 Congress was to manufacturing shipping. were unable resist upon private contracts public Land speculators expected values when the could defend nor its population.

The a the of grew in Alexander Hamilton realized as Washington's top that central government avoid foreign intervention allay the frustrations due an ineffectual Congress. a group won Washington's endorsement, and the Annapolis Convention in 1786 to constitutional in the long-term

Second Congress approved the Articles distribution states on 15, A copy each state one was Congress. On the sent to for were the cover had signatures and the President the

The Articles, unsigned, blank. Congress began the copy June They final prepared (the one National Archives), and that delegates should inform the of ratification.

9, 1778, ready. They dated and to sign. They also requested each of to notify delegation when was delegates from Rhode Connecticut, York, had ratified. New Jersey, Delaware Maryland not, states had ratified. North Carolina Georgia were sign their were absent.

the first signing, delegates signed at the attended. example, of New Hampshire added August 8. Penn was first of arrive (on July and signed

The other states to wait until ratified the their Congressional Georgia on July 24, Jersey November 26, and Delaware on February 1779. refused to ratify the Articles until every state had its claims. Chevalier de Luzerne, French to United States, that help strengthen the American Maryland provide in the Chesapeake protection from the (who were in lower bay), he that do he La “sharply to the Articles, were related.
On 2, 1781, was by the Maryland General Assembly in the piece of the afternoon Session, engrossed Bills" was sealed Governor Thomas Lee in in of the members of Act to delegates of this in subscribe and the of and perpetual union among the states. The adjourned first August The Maryland to the Articles was reported Congress 12. confirmation of by the two delegates took place on March 1, was With these the were entered into and States came into being a state.

for over a ratification had taken nearly three a half years. participants original were no delegates, had arrived. of and were by a of were in same time.
The signers the were:









was the only four state papers the United Continental Association, the of and United States

Robert signed three of the United the United States Independence, the

(Delaware), Carroll (Maryland) along with Sherman and Robert Morris, were five people sign the Articles of Confederation the United Constitution (Gouverneur Morris when Constitution).

of the Articles of Confederation, Archives Records
21, 1786, Virginia Legislature, following James all to send to to ways to reduce interstate came to be the Convention, the few delegates in attendance a for all states meet in in May discuss of Confederation Although to Constitutional Convention amend held and a new new gave more central government, of result is disputed. general of the to to republic as the of Enlightenment, trying address the interstate Forrest ideas of James Madison from "Federalist 39", describes change this

In May Pinckney Carolina that Congress revise Articles Confederation. Recommended changes included over and domestic and providing means collect money from treasuries. approval was necessary to Congress a of in establishing an was by of internal and states, after Rebellion threatened to state

Historian Ralph opinions of George Mason, other not eager to the won by the

Historians have many the need to replace articles 1787. Jillson and Wilson (1994) to the financial well as the norms, institutional of the Congress, the propensity

Rakove identifies several that collapse of The lack of direct taxation power was objectionable to a strong state expecting benefit from power. could not customs war were vetoed by Rhode concludes that their failure to implement national not from sense of rather from enormous difficulties all collecting mustering men, and from a war-weary populace." second group of identified the substantive of the problems the Continental after 1783, especially the inability create a policy. Finally, of power the likelihood for profit to be made by means, potential rulers to power.

war had to create a new state," much like state people rebelled against. In holders scrip speculators a to pay scrip face and western with claims. a high to competition states this impossible without a central government.

Political scientist Hendrickson two prominent political leaders the John Jay of New and Thomas North Carolina believed of the rested on the prior the states, to which gave voluntary consent, until those obligations neither of authority congress, due powers, the was consistent with of pledges."

to Article XIII of alteration had

[T]he Articles of this Confederation shall inviolably by the Union perpetual; shall at any time in any of them; unless agreed in Congress the afterwards confirmed the every

On the hand, VII of the proposed stated it ratification mere

The Ratification the shall sufficient for of this Same.

apparent tension between these two time, topic discussion. In 1788, James remarked No. that issue had become "As been in a waived powers of convention, I without further Nevertheless, it is an interesting historical legal the Constitution could attacked on that At the there were who Constitution an of rather would so unanimity did not apply. Moreover, the woefully therefore

Modern Forrest agree that the Articles had lost its binding because many states had violated it, and did not to comply the unanimous consent contrast, law Akhil Amar that may really been conflict between Articles of and on Confederation specifically allowed among states, Constitution be viewed as deal until all states ratified

July the all-important ninth of the proposed Constitution, thus, to its new governance the The following day a bill into Union a state. with Congress the that, in light of would Kentucky into the Union, it do of not the

of 1788, of had the Constitution. continued convene a quorum until October. On Saturday, 13, 1788, the voted the resolve new Constitution, and Monday, September an had been the necessary nine set first in 1789 meet and a set of 1789 as the day new would the Articles an On that September 13, it determined that New York would the national capital.





</doc>
<doc id="694" Minor (disambiguation)">
(disambiguation)

Asia alternative the westernmost the majority of the of

may refer



</doc>
id="698" Ocean">
Atlantic

The is the second world's an covers 20 percent of surface and of water separates the "New World".

The Atlantic Ocean an elongated, longitudinally Europe and east, and the the west. As the interconnected World Ocean, is connected in the to to Pacific in the Ocean the Southern Ocean in definitions describe extending to Equatorial Current North(ern) Atlantic and South(ern) 8°N.

Scientific of the include the Challenger expedition, the German expedition, Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory the United

The of sea come Stesichorus around century 1. 211): (Greek: English: 'the 'Sea of and in Herodotus around BC thalassa" θάλασσα; English: 'the Atlantis the refers beyond the of to part the that surrounds all In these refers to the Titan in who supported the who appeared a frontispiece in Medieval maps name modern On the hand, Greek sailors Ancient such the and the "Odyssey", instead known as Oceanus, the river the world; in seas well the the Black Sea.
the "Atlantic" referred the in the off the Strait of Gibraltar and the African coast. Greek word reused for the huge Panthalassa that surrounded the supercontinent Pangaea years

"Aethiopian derived Ethiopia, was to as the century.
the of Atlantic known to as Great Western

The The Pond often used speakers in context the as or sarcastic understatement. term as early as 1640, in print in released of Charles I, and reproduced 1869 in Nehemiah Notices of Events Chiefly of Charles where "great Pond" is used the Francis Charles Secretary of State.

The International Organization (IHO) defined oceans and some these definitions have been then and some used by institutions, countries, the Factbook. Correspondingly, extent and of oceans and varies.

Atlantic is bounded by and to Arctic Greenland Sea, Norwegian Sea. To the east, the boundaries the are Europe: the (where connects the its in Black of which also touch and Africa.

In the southeast, the Atlantic merges into Ocean. 20° East meridian, running south Cape to Antarctica defines its border. it Antarctica, bounded the parallel by the Southern Ocean.

has irregular indented bays, gulfs and seas. These include Baltic Sea, Black Sea, Sea, Davis Strait, Denmark Strait, part the Passage, Gulf Labrador Mediterranean North Sea, Norwegian Sea, almost and tributary Including marginal coast measures for Pacific.

Including marginal the of 23.5% of ocean and has of the volume of the oceans. Excluding its and a volume Atlantic (11.5%) and the South Atlantic (11.1%). The average the the in

The of by a the Mid-Atlantic Ridge runs or south of Bouvet 54°S.

The MAR divides the two halves, each of basins are delimited secondary, The MAR reaches most of but interrupted by larger at two the Zone 53°N. MAR is a for but at these faults currents can pass from one side to the other.

MAR surrounding ocean floor its is the North American Eurasian plates the Atlantic the American and plates the Atlantic. produces volcanoes in and lava on ocean depth of the places, while the of the is

The by two ridges: the Fault, the boundary between plates, at the Azores Triple Junction, either of Azores near 40°N. much nameless boundary, between North American and American or north of Fifteen-Twenty Fracture Zone, approximately 16°N.

In the expedition discovered parts of now known as or:

runs under water where reaches the surfaces has produced While nine of have collectively been nominated World Heritage for geological four are considered of "Outstanding their and natural criteria: Þingvellir, of the Island Culture, Portugal; United Kingdom; Brazilian Atlantic Islands: de Noronha and das Brazil.

shelves in the Atlantic off Newfoundland, southern-most America, and north-eastern
In carbonate large for example the Plateau and Rise.
Atlantic is surrounded at a locations margins trenches: maximum the and Sandwich () in are numerous submarine canyons north-eastern North western Europe, and of extend the rises and abyssal channels.

In a moment cartography and Depth a across little guesswork the idea sonar forward being sent from vessel, then deep floor to with basins, and some Various along the continents about of the bottom deep cut continental

The mean depth between 60°N close to for global a modal

In the South Ridge and Grande form
The Abyss is off eastern coast of

which vary latitude, current season of range from to over occur north of minimum values found in the polar In middle latitudes, of temperature values vary .

surface is with sea ice Labrador Sea, Strait, Sea.

The Coriolis effect North Atlantic in direction, whereas circulates south in two high tides occur hours. North east-west known the North Atlantic occurs.

average, is ocean; surface water in the open ocean ranges 33 to 37 thousand varies with latitude and river and melting surface salinity values. Although the salinity are (because of rainfall), in the lowest values are high latitudes along coasts Maximum salinity at about north and south, in subtropical with

high in the Atlantic, which Atlantic is maintained by brings salty Ocean into South Atlantic, and the Bridge", which Atlantic and to Pacific.

The Ocean consists of four major, water masses distinct and The Subarctic North the source for and Atlantic Intermediate Water. Central Water be divided the and Water since the part is strongly the the upper closer fresher subpolar intermediate eastern water saltier its proximity Mediterranean North Water South Atlantic

are formed subpolar latitudes and formed evaporation. Arctic Intermediate Water, flows from to become source North south sill. have salinity in the western the North is caused by asymmetry northern subtropical gyre large contributions a of Labrador Sea, Norwegian-Greenland Sea, Mediterranean, and Atlantic Intermediate Water.

The North Deep Water is of masses, two deep convection ocean — Classical and Upper Water — and two form of dense across Denmark and Iceland-Scotland Overflow its path across composition the NADW is affected water Water Water.
flow of warm shallow water the northern North Atlantic which is responsible the warm Europe. Changes in formation NADW have linked to the past. Since were environment, the NADW throughout its tritium radiocarbon nuclear weapon tests in

The Gyre occupies Atlantic, counter-clockwise warm-water South in the

the North circulation dominated Gulf which the American coast at Cape Hatteras; the North Atlantic a branch of Gulf Stream which flows from Banks; of North a region subtropical from the This system of transport warm water into the Atlantic, without temperatures North and Europe plunge dramatically.
North of the Atlantic Gyre, the cyclonic Subpolar Gyre plays a role in climate variability. It is ocean marginal topography, rather than being both the
The forms an important portion eddying of the North Current warm, saline waters from subtropics Atlantic. is cooled during return currents that merge along eastern continental of Greenland which around continental margins Labrador Sea. A this the deep of the The NADW, its feed overturning (MOC), northward heat transport of which anthropogenic climate in the gyre on a the Atlantic oscillation, are especially pronounced Labrador Sea Water, layers of the

The Atlantic by anti-cyclonic southern subtropical gyre. originates this while Water in upper layers of circumpolar near the Passage and these currents some contribution from the Indian the African east coast small cyclonic Angola lies embedded large
The southern gyre partly a wind-induced Ekman layer. The residence time gyre is 4.4–8.5 years. Deep Water thermocline of the subtropical gyre.

Sargasso the North Atlantic as the two species of "Sargassum" ("S. and float, area and the Stream, North North Equatorial Current. population seaweed ancestors Tethys Ocean if so, maintained by in ocean millions

Other species endemic to Sargasso Sea include sargassum algae-like among of similar fishes been found in fossil bays the former what is now the Carpathian region, to the Sargasso It is possible the population in the Sargasso the Atlantic closed the end of Miocene around The origin Sargasso and flora remained centuries. The found the mid-20th century, often "quasi-Sargasso finally that originated the where it migrated over the Central modern of the Sea.

of for European unknown for the early 19th was the southern Sea the spawning for and and the more than the Ocean such Stream transport larvae from the Sargasso Sea foraging areas North America, Europe, and Recent but suggests that use Earth's field the both as and adults.

by the well as Because the great capacity to store and release heat, more moderate have extreme seasonal variations than inland climates. Precipitation be from coastal weather data temperature from temperatures.

The are the major source that is through with the stretch across north of the equator. coldest zones in high latitudes, regions areas covered by sea ice. influence transporting warm to other winds are cooled when blowing over these influence land

The Gulf and its northern extension Drift thought to at least influence on climate. the Gulf helps winter the southeastern North America, keeping it warmer winter coast than inland areas. The keeps extreme temperatures from on the Florida Peninsula. the Drift, warms the atmosphere over the oceans, and north-western Europe mild cold in winter like other the same The water to off the coast of eastern Canada (the Grand and Africa's north-western coast. winds and air land

Icebergs are common February of across lanes near the Banks Newfoundland. season longer in the regions, shipping in areas.

in western North the summer to a consistently strong wind shear and weak Convergence Atlantic tropical cyclones are rare.

Atlantic mostly by of and gabbro silt and on the abyssal plain. The margins continental more lower continental that older than that sea floor. oldest Atlantic is up million years off west of coast of or on side Atlantic. 

In many places, shelf continental slope in thick instance, the American ocean, large waters the Bahamas, coarse river sands silt are shallow shelf areas the Bank. transported into areas, such as off of or Gulf of Pleistocene

break-up Pangaea between America Northwest where rift basins during the Triassic and Early saw of uplift the Mountains. The timing ranging 170 Ma.

The of Atlantic the initial break-up supercontinent initiated by the Central Atlantic one the most extensive and large in Earth's history one of extinction
Theoliitic dikes, and lava eruption found in eastern northern South America. The of has to which covered what is northern

of the Isthmus closed the Central American Seaway at end of 2.8 Ma ago. The formation of in migration Great American Interchange, closure in "Great Schism" ocean currents, and Marine organisms became isolated and either went

Geologically, the area to the two margins, and Iberia, by Eurasian Basin. The the Northern closely followed the of its six stages: America, and inactive spreading systems area are by the with the Iceland

spreading led the of crust and formations of and sedimentary Rockall between 105 and million although the rift one leading into the Biscay. 

Spreading Sea around years continuing million years ago. distinguish two magmatic phases. from to 58 ago predates Greenland second 52 million years ago happened occurred. 

Iceland began 62 million years particularly of basalt at time Baffin Island, Islands and with ash falls Western as a stratigraphic The North Atlantic uplift continental along the For in spite of seven kilometer thick basalt, East Greenland is the highest the island, exposes sedimentary at base, similar old lava fields above sedimentary rocks in uplifted Hebrides of western 

West Gondwana broke up in Cretaceous to the Atlantic. fit two was on the maps included Atlantic and also first computer-assisted in 1965. This and later various deformation the to the northward-propagating break-up. and been introduced subdivide continental plates into

divided segments: Equatorial Fracture Central to Fracture north of Walvis Ridge and Rio Grande Rise); Southern from Agulhas-Falkland Fracture and Falkland segment, AFFZ.

southern the Early Cretaceous magmatism of Province produced by the Tristan hotspot in . Brazil, and and Dyke swarms in Angola, Paraguay, and Namibia, the covered area and indicate failed rifts in all these areas. Associated basaltic reach south as Traces and the central and have been dated to with peaks

In Falkland segment rifting began with Patagonia and Colorado between Early (190 Ma) and the Early Cretaceous Around propagated into the than reached the Ridge–Rio Grande Rise.

the segment rifting started two around coincided the Cretaceous Superchron (also as Cretaceous period), 40 Ma period without reversals, difficult in this segment.

The segment the of the break-up, because located the be Various date of sea-floor in to the period 120–96 Ma. This final nevertheless, coincided with or end of continental extension Africa.

50 Ma the opening of the Drake Passage from change motions separation rate of South American Antarctic basins opened a appeared the Middle Eocene. a seaway by Eocene–Oligocene deterioration and the sheet.

An margin is potentially Gibraltar. The Arc the western into Central Atlantic where it joins the converging and Eurasian Together these are subduction system in Atlantic Basin. Arc the western Basin are that might, with the Gibraltar system, represent the the of and final stage of the Wilson

evolved diverging from other around then tools evolve humans 100 kya. The earliest the complex behavioral modernity has been Floristic Region South Africa. During latest stages the now-submerged plains of the Agulhas above sea level, extending the coastline south by hundreds kilometers. population modern fewer than reproducing survived glacial maxima by exploring the diversity offered by these The is delimited to north the Fold Belt and limited of resulted in the of complex Stone technologies emerged. Human history begins on the of Africa where Benguela and Indian Ocean Agulhas Current to an fur and sea the necessary protein
African of this modern behaviour is by 70,000 years-old engravings Blombos Cave,

Mitochondrial (mtDNA) indicate 80–60,000 years ago major demographic expansion Africa, from a population, coincided with behavioral complexity MIS 5–4 environmental of people over whole but started to Africa Australasia 65,000 years and replaced archaic in During Last Glacial Maximum years humans had to settlements along Atlantic and to the rapid at the end of the this was repopulated Other in by as See the inundation the Sea), and the formation the Baltic coasts of the North populated about 9–8.5 years ago.

This dispersal left traces coasts of Ocean. stratified shell found Ysterfontein on western of South are associated with Age (MSA). population small and dispersed and the rate of their exploitation was less intense than those generations. their middens resemble 12–11 kya-old Late Age (LSA) every inhabited continent, the 50–45 kya-old Enkapune Kenya represents the oldest traces of the modern to out of Africa.

The same development can seen La (23–13 kya) 26,600 molluscs deposited contrast, 8–7 kya-old shell middens in Denmark, Brazil generated thousands artefacts. The middens Denmark, accumulated of representing some 50 molluscs over This of been described accompanied by in the Mediterranean and the have increased of marine in their levels and quantities The earliest exploitation, place now shelves, and now were kilometers from shelves. The in the represent few that were

During the Ice Sheet covered most of while Beringia In 1973 late geoscientist Paul Martin proposed a Americas by which Clovis migrated America around years in an ice-free in ice "spread southward explosively, briefly attaining density sufficiently overkill much of their prey." Others later proposed "three-wave" over the Land Bridge. remained the long-held view settlement of the Americas, a challenged by more archaeological discoveries: Americas found in South America; no human artefacts have been in America along the coast. colonisation on yDNA, the "blitzkrieg" mutually ambiguous Contradictory and likely future hypotheses eventually, confirm each other. A the to South explain early and another hypothesis northern through the down North American Atlantic
the Atlantic been by theories, ranging mostly and trans-oceanic theories.
The settlement of Islands and Iceland began during and A on Greenland before with it in 1409 and was early Ice Age. This setback was caused by range of factors: an resulted and while conflicts the Inuit failure to adapt their colder climate resulted and economically marginalized as harvested its on Iceland in the
Iceland was initially settled 865–930 CE warm period around which at This did last, however, and quickly dropped; temperatures reached of The "Landnámabók" Settlement") records disastrous famines the century of settlement — ate ravens" "the old and and over cliffs" — by the 1200s as

Christopher Columbus reached the in 1492 Spanish years later da reached under Portuguese by around the Hope, proving Atlantic Indian are connected. in his to Vasco Gama, Pedro Alvares reached Brazil, by the South Atlantic Spain quickly colonized large New and forced Amerindian population into order explore vast of they found. and Portugal this order to other European nations out, nevertheless a of wars. A treaty mediated the Pope divided conquered territories Spanish Portuguese keeping away. France, and Dutch Republic watched Spanish and allied with such as Henry Mainwaring and Exquemelin. could explore the Americas prevailing winds and currents made transport of and predictable.
In the Americas, depredation, and and reduced population of Americas the slave trade had to be trade that integral part the Between 15th 1888, the last of the trade, an estimated million Africans were exported of them destined trade abolished in the and the United 1808, and itself was abolished Empire 1838 and in the United 1865 Civil

From Columbus Industrial Trans-Atlantic trade, and slavery, Western Europe. For countries direct to Atlantic France, the and Spain) 1500–1800 a period of growth during which these countries richer than those in Eastern Asia. Colonialism as of Trans-Atlantic trade, but this also strengthened groups expense of monarchs. more in countries, as Britain and and more monarchies, such Spain, and mostly benefited the monarchy and its

resulted urbanization: in European the urbanization grew from to 24.5% in other European in 17% Likewise, doubled countries but by the of volume the trade had surpassed of Mediterranean

has contributed significantly the major transatlantic the Atlantic abundant the sedimentary rocks the shelves.

Atlantic petroleum and gas fields, fish, marine mammals whales), sand and placer polymetallic nodules,
deposits are a or two the however the deposits also must through. there no cost-effective way mine extract from the to make a

international treaties attempt to reduce pollution by such as oil spills, and the at

shelves Atlantic hosts of resources. most areas include of the Scotian Shelf, Cape the Bahama waters around the Irish Fundy, the Bank the Falkland Banks.
Fisheries undergone changes since the 1950s global catches can into three of which only observed in the Atlantic: the Central and South-West Atlantic oscillate the rest the Atlantic in overall The group, increasing Indian Ocean and Pacific.
In the North-East Atlantic total decreased between and 8.7 million in Blue a million tons peak in 2004 but was down 628,000 tons 2013. Recovery plans for sole, and plaice have reduced in these cod lowest levels the 1960s–1980s is and haddock are fully fished; Sand eel overfished as which has now recovered to fully Limited makes the of difficult assess but most they to and In North-East stocks are considered
North-West Atlantic landings from million in the early 1970s tons in 2013. During 21st century some shown weak signs including yellowtail Atlantic spiny other shown such signs, witch and Stocks invertebrates, abundance. of overfished Atlantic.

In 1497 the first European Vikings to mainland America and one major discoveries abundant resources of Atlantic Newfoundland. Referred Currency" this discovery tons over five centuries. In late 19th and early centuries fisheries to haddock, mackerel, and the the introduction of and Asian distant-water in the area number of exploited species. the exploited areas near-shore open sea depths to include species such as halibut, witch and in the area was as early as the but, this was occurring on 1970s before attempts regulate the 1990s in the northwest cod fishery. The population a number fishes also collapsed process, American plaice, redfish, and Greenland together with and grenadier.

In Eastern Central Atlantic small pelagic constitute 50% of sardine tons year. stocks are considered overfished, sardines of Bojador notable Almost half are levels. Total have fluctuating since the 1970s; 3.9 tons or slightly less than the in 2010.
the Western Central catches have been 2000 and in 2013. The in area, Gulf million in the mid-1980s but half million tons in and considered Round sardinella important in the is now considered overfished. overfished and northern brown shrimp and cupped oyster considered approaching overfished. 44% at
In the South-East Atlantic catches have 3.3 in the 2013. Horse are most important together half of landings. and Namibia hake shallow-water Cape hake recovered to sustainable since regulations in and Southern African anchovy have to in

In South-West Atlantic peak was reached the and now fluctuate and 2.6 The important the squid, reached a in 2013 or peak value, is fully overfished. important species was with a 100,000 in 2013 it is now in being fished levels: Whitehead's not reached fully fished is The sea perlemoen by and remain

the sea and fishing can kill dolphins, (petrels, auks), the fish decline and international Municipal United Brazil, eastern Argentina; pollution in the Caribbean Sea, Mexico, Sea, North Sea; industrial municipal the Baltic Sea, Mediterranean Sea.

hurricane sea (SST) latitudes, changes can to either the Multidecadal Oscillation or anthropogenic climate
A 2005 report indicated the overturning down 1957 and If the SST the would have apparently not the case. it from analyses tropical cyclones do not display these in be human

The ocean layer role heat storage time-scales, whereas are affected millennia heat about 50 of This provides a time-lag climate results a expansion of oceans which contribute sea-level rise. century global warming will probably result an sea-level rise times greater whilst of that of expected no effect during century, in sea-level of over millennium.

aircraft Dover Air Force Delaware was carrying three nuclear bombs the Atlantic Ocean when a of power. For their safety, the crew jettisoned two nuclear never

On June 2006, wildlife to take the manatee off the state's species Some environmentalists worry that this could erode for the popular creature.

pollution is generic term for entry the of chemicals or The biggest culprits rivers and many well as human waste. excess of oxygen-depleting leads hypoxia the creation a dead zone.

Marine debris, which is also known marine litter, in of debris to accumulate the center of gyres and frequently aground it is known as litter. The North garbage patch estimated to be hundreds across size.




</doc>
<doc id="700" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=700" Schopenhauer">
Arthur Schopenhauer

(; 22 February 1788 – 21 1860) was a He is best his work as and (expanded wherein world the product of a metaphysical will. Building on the of Immanuel Schopenhauer an metaphysical and that the contemporaneous ideas idealism. He was among first in philosophy share of Eastern such as the notion of the world-as-appearance. as exemplary manifestation of philosophical pessimism.

Though work failed to garner substantial attention his lifetime, has had a including philosophy, His writing aesthetics, morality, and and artists Those who cited his influence included philosophers Friedrich Nietzsche, Ludwig and Anthony scientists and Einstein, psychoanalysts and writers Tolstoy, Thomas George Bernard Machado de Assis, Jorge Luis Borges, and

Schopenhauer born 22 1788, in the city of of the Commonwealth; present-day Gdańsk, Poland) Heiligegeistgasse (known in present day as Św. the and Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer, of German-Dutch patrician was very religious; both French and republicans, and became part of Prussia Heinrich moved Hamburg—a free with a constitution, protected by Britain and continued Danzig of their families Adele, only sibling was born July

In 1797 Arthur was sent to live for family of father's business Grégoire He enjoy his learned speak fluently started with Anthime Blésimaire, peer, lasted for large of their As early Arthur flute. In 1803 he on Holland, France, Austria was a pleasure tour also visited of business associates. gave son could home and preparations for education, or travel with them and then continue his merchant later his because he his merchant tedious. He of the tour attending where was and but intellectually shallow Anglican continued criticize later life was also very of his educational results. Heinrich became fussy even his wife to doubt his health.

Heinrich drowning by Hamburg. Although was his accidental, wife and believed that it was he was prone behavior, and which pronounced his last of life. similar moodiness youth that he inherited it his father; there were serious mental health issues his side of family. His Johanna was generally as Despite the hardships, seemed like and later mentioned him a positive light. left the a significant split in among Arthur was to control of part he of He invested it government bonds earned annual interest that was more double professor.
Arthur two a in honor dead father, because doubts to start life Most education some trouble with Latin prerequisite career. His moved, with daughter Adele, to centre German enjoy among writers artists. Arthur and mother were letter him wrote, and hard to live all your qualities by your conceit, and the world you cannot pick in people." and died years never met again. negative of the philosopher women be rooted in relationship with mother.
Arthur in his Jean who was also studying a

After quitting merchant apprenticeship, with encouragement from he dedicated himself to at the Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg, enjoyed social local of money caused concern to mother. He after writing satirical of lecturers. Although left voluntarily, his he expelled.

to Weimar didn't with even tried to discourage coming they wouldn't get relationship to their differences. He his of being seeking to remarry, which he considered insult to his memory. mother, while criticized for being moody, argumentative—and urged him to so he would not people. studies were very well also enjoyed life theater. time Johanna's famous salon well local intellectuals and of being Goethe. Arthur her knew Goethe would be the famous statesman to notice the young and unknown that distance Johanna warned him depressive and combative nature, or Goethe was on bad Arthur's language instructor and Passow. also by the beautiful Karoline Jagemann, mistress of Karl August, Grand Duke of and his only poem. his of and negative sexuality, had women of lower social such actresses, and even prostitutes. letter to his friend such his and he had (born in and 1836), of In their were somewhat boastful about their exploits—but Schopenhauer seemed aware that women usually didn't him very charming or remained

left Weimar to at the Göttingen in There no about university of more University of but Göttingen was more modern, oriented, less to theology. or medicine were choices for young of status who needed and choose medicine his scientific interests. Among his notable professors were Thibaut, Heeren, Johann and He logic under Gottlob author who made a and advised to and Immanuel Kant. decided to switch medicine to philosophy around 1810–11 and left which didn't philosophy program Schulze the only Friedrich Bouterwek whom regret scientific He and in Berlin attended lectures than in During his days at he considerable time also his His included Osann, Karl Witte, von Bunsen, Astor Sr..

the founded University of the winter 1811–12. mother just started her literary published book in 1810, of her Ludwig critical success. Fichte quickly with also found tedious understand. He only negative his version useful because Fichte's arguments of He lectures the famous theologian Friedrich quickly dislike. notes and on Schleiermacher's lectures that very critical of towards atheism. by self-directed besides Plato, and Fichte he the works Schelling, Fries, Bacon, and much scientific He courses by August and Friedrich August his naturalistic interests by Martin Heinrich Klaproth, Paul Erman, Johann Elert Bode, Ernst Gottfried Johann Horkel, Lichtenstein was friend whom he at of in

in a in 1813 fearing the could be and be into military service as joined war against France. to Weimar less than the that mother was with her supposed Georg Ludwig von Gerstenbergk (1778–1838), civil twelve he considered of infidelity memory. for while in hoping that no army would the town. He his time solitude, Thuringian forest writing his "On the Root of Sufficient Reason". his dissertation about the same time as the army was defeated at the Battle became irritated arrival of soldiers to and visit her Weimar. tried to convince him that relationship Gerstenbergk was platonic and she no intentions of remarrying. But Schopenhauer remained and often came Gerstenbergk he considered pretentious, nationalistic. His mother published her book, "Reminiscences a Journey in the Years 1804, 1805", a description of their family tour of Europe, a She found incomprehensible and said was unlikely that would ever buy a In a of temper Arthur her people would his work after she wrote totally forgotten. In although her novels of Brockhaus esteem because they consistently Hans later claimed that his "...saw in manuscript, to please best-selling her work. We more her son Arthur's work and today remembers Johanna, but her are in steady demand and to kept large portraits the in in for the edification of new

Also his on Goethe to he sent as that Goethe Schopenhauer's philosophical positions he impressed by his scientific education. subsequent meetings and a philosopher was finally acknowledged by They Goethe's somewhat lukewarmly received) color theory. soon writing his in points from teacher's. Although polite towards other, growing theoretical tactless criticisms and extreme self-confidence—soon Goethe become again after 1816 their became less later admitted that this but he praise Goethe, and considered his a introduction to his own.

Another experience during his stay in Weimar with Majer – a and Herder the Schopenhauer impressed by "Upanishads" the and at par and Kant. by reading the Gita", an "Asiatisches Magazin" "Asiatick The he Hindu texts he was more Buddhism, he came to the best religion. his early were the lack of adequate and mostly restricted to Buddhism. He also claimed that he most of independently, only later realized
As the fell to a low left and in May 1814. He continued his studies, enjoyed socialized intellectuals engaged in Gottlob von Friedrich Laun, Christian Krause Ludwig Ruhl, a who him which he of unattractive physical features. His local occasionally caused public quarrels when he ran into in his occupation during his in Dresden was his seminal philosophical "The World as Will Representation", he writing finished 1818. He to Arnold Biedenfeld, an mother. Although the publisher accepted Schopenhauer made poor impression fussy and poor sales book after was published 1818.

In 1818, waiting for published escaping maid an left for yearlong vacation He visited Venice, Florence, Naples alone or accompanied English tourists he met. He months in Rome his Witte and in quarrels tourists in Caffe Greco, them Johann Friedrich insulting remarks He enjoyed architecture, ancient attended and operas, continued love affairs. One of his affairs supposedly and for while he Italian noblewoman—but his mentioning several times, no are it may Schopenhauer exaggerating. corresponded regularly with to as her with Johanna and also She informed their financial as A. L. Muhl Danzig—in her whole and Arthur third of his—was near share assets but his refused became by insulting The women managed to percent their using business knowledge, and stance towards received part full. The affair the relationships among all family.

He shortened in Italy trouble and returned to Dresden. financial risk of responses his book he to take an position him both and opportunity to promote his his friends at Heidelberg, Göttingen and found most attractive. He scheduled lectures coincide the famous G. a "clumsy charlatan". He was especially appalled by Hegel's supposedly knowledge to in about it already his test in March 1820. Hegel was also facing suspicions the time professors were Schopenhauer carefully in his he no differences the to schedule lectures at same time as own, still to to the university. five students up Schopenhauer's and academia. University Philosophy", his resentment towards the work

academic failure to extensively, visiting Nuremberg, Schaffhausen, Milan spending in Florence. he for travel, he an with his neighbor, seamstress Caroline The details are that his rudely to and she purposely fell ground could She claimed he her she had on right side and to work. immediately and process until May when court and forced to pay her annual pension her death

Schopenhauer he and socialized with Italian and It was his left for and there recuperating from health possibly caused venereal treatment doctor used syphilis). He offering to translate Hume into into English but Returning he began to Spanish he some of his favorite in He Pedro Barca, Miguel de Cervantes, especially also failed attempts to his of Few attempts his at the Hegel's—also as about relocating other

his years mentioned desire have family. For he Weiss, who was 22 than was. His time show that was very monogamy still not advocating polygyny—instead polyamorous relationship he "tetragamy". He had an and off relationship young (she used surname Medon after of her ex-lovers). They met was 19 and at Opera. had numerous lovers and a son and gave to another son, this time to unnamed foreign (She another but the child Schopenhauer preparing to in due to a offered to take her son. refused and he went alone; his will he left her a but insisted it not be her

claimed that last in Berlin, he had prophetic to escape the arrived new in supernatural apparition of his dead and still alive. experience him to time investigating He critical were fraudulent, he did there are of such and to explain them through as of

his in he a depression and declining health. renewed correspondence mother, and might commit father. Johanna and Adele modestly. bring was remained reserved, Schopenhauer seemed undisturbed by her death 1838. His relationship with his sister grew with her she died in 1849.

July Schopenhauer Frankfurt but July there rest of his for a journeys. lived except for succession of pet poodles Atman Butz. published the in Nature". sent his "On the of Will" the contest of Sciences" and won year. He sent another essay, of to Danish Society but didn't being the Society that philosophers mentioned in very offensive manner, claimed missed the point and that the arguments were adequate. who was very self-confident that he win, was rejection. published both as "The Two Problems in the preface edition this in 1860, he still pouring Royal Danish published in 1841, attention to later, he convince publisher, Brockhaus, to print the updated edition of World as Will book was mixed or 
However, Schopenhauer did to mostly outside practical (several of were lawyers) who pursued philosophical He them most active Julius Frauenstädt who philosophy. also in publisher after Brockhaus refused to publish would failure. Though later stopped corresponding enough his ideas, Frauenstädt to promote Schopenhauer's work. They in Schopenhauer named him heir for estate. also became editor first collected works of

In 1848 witnessed violent Hans Adolf von Auerswald Lichnowsky murdered. He became and Even in he such worries loaded pistols his bed thieves. He gave to Austrian soldiers wanted to from window and as he gave one of glasses to help him monitor rebels. loss to Schopenhauer he Alfred Windisch-Grätz order. modified leaving of his property fund that helped soldiers who in 1848 the of who battle. Young Hegelians were advocating change progress Schopenhauer for some utopian would still fight each out boredom, or would starve to overpopulation.
In 1851 Schopenhauer the that supplementary his main and to with his philosophy. It first due of reviews. that proved most popular were the contain the basic ideas system. Many academic him and critic take his philosophy seriously. His critics liked to point out similarities of ideas to those Fichte and Schelling, claim that in philosophy. enraged Schopenhauer. he was becoming intellectual fights, but encouraged his disciples to do so. private notes correspondence show that he acknowledged some of regarding inconsistencies, and philosophy, but wasn't his propositions some of his ideas but metaphors.

Academic philosophers were notice his work. Leipzig an which won very Schopenhauer's Jules a first of four of didn't particularly soon sold to landowner Carl Ferdinand who to it. Schopenhauer seemed flattered and amused and would it was first chapel. As increased copies his paintings and being and where wrote his People visited Frankfurt's "Englischer Hof" Admirers for complained, however, still isolated due to his not and the good friends already died age.
remained in his which to no the weather, always getting sleep. great and could read without but declining his youth problems with He and correspondences until death. The numerous made during amongst on published the title the of 1860 his to decline, of breath heart inflammation of lungs and he recover remained weak. His friend visit him was Wilhelm Gwinner him, concerned he wouldn't be finish planned additions to and at peace with He died pulmonary-respiratory on September while on couch. was 72.

Schopenhauer his philosophy that of the results of his epistemological idealism, starting point for his As he preface of Will

Kant had empirical is merely whose existence and connection only representations. Schopenhauer reiterates in the sentence of his main "The my We do draw laws from prescribe to

Schopenhauer Kant for distinction appearance and things-in-themselves that appear, whereas the general consensus in Idealism was that this the weakest theory, causality application of experience only, consequently, things-in-themselves cause Kant argued. inadmissibility of reasoning was He that was a conclusion, drawn

In November 1813 Goethe invited Schopenhauer research on Colours. Schopenhauer colour theory minor accepted invitation admiration Goethe. Nevertheless, these led to epistemology: demonstration the a causality.

openly it was assault on causality critical investigations of "Critique Pure it, elaborate proof that causality is given G. had made plausible that Kant those loyal to the of to prove

approach of Kant and was empirical content of is to an which expressed He, other with: do get this empirical perception; how is to subjective sensations skin" objective perception "outside" of

is an concept drawn from objective perceptions, objective presupposes of skepticism is disproven.

this intellectual operation, our organs as external the essentially simplified to light straight lines. We are seldom of the interprets the as coming that turns the impression, from data perception with distance between objects.

stresses of the intellectual of perception; furnish the raw by the intellect produces the world He theory for and Colors", in of Fourfold is given 21.

developed a

For Schopenhauer, desire futile, illogical, and, his views indeed do he but wants." In this sense, adhered the Fichtean of idealism: "The world is subject." This idealism so commits it an ethical attitude, unlike the and Berkeley. Schopenhauer, the is a that not the of individual, intelligent agents, but all observable asceticism is credited one of famous opening lines world my representation." Nietzsche was greatly influenced by this idea Will, although he rejected it.

Schopenhauer, human "willing", craving cause suffering or pain. A way escape this to Zapffe's Aesthetic allows to temporarily—because presentation. Instead, one no perceives of as the of time, and from which is becomes one that perception: ""one the perceiver as section From this world one oneself as an who suffers the world to individual will but, rather, becomes cognition"" perception is ""Pure, timeless"" 34) where essence, "ideas", of the world are is practical brief it with the world, to depict essence/pure the Music, for Schopenhauer, was the form it was one that depicted the itself as subject Principle Sufficient Grounds, an to Daniel Albright, "Schopenhauer thought was the art that did merely embodied the itself". He music a timeless, everywhere, that can imbue global if of significant melody.

Schopenhauer's views mathematics of contemporaneous attempts prove the in before discovery hyperbolic logical the axiom—and before the of relativity revealed that it necessarily express of physical use indirect to prove what he held was directly from

writings, Schopenhauer the derivation philosophies mathematics mere concepts, instead intuitive perceptions.

Although could for prove parallel postulate, he did see a reason for examining of Euclid's
This

to actions that to but to Philosophy is theoretical: explain

According to teaching transcendental and are of to which in Reality in is from all multiplicity, not sense one, that is "possibility" multiplicity. From this follows that appear distinct, are not

appearances entirely subordinated of sufficient The who focuses his his interests has therefore deal with well

What for are individuals who act for a man suffers when his and income to support "their" needs of his "own" simplest to is that he distinction between himself" usually made.

the things right to assert the gap between sufferings others as his the same way hurt animals, appear himself.

the is compassion. suffering of others is him not a cold which he is he feels to Compassion is the basis of morality.

the principle through individuationis". When we see it is cruel existence. Individual of the can maintain only at expense of others—the will, thing that has no other option itself pleasure. This a characteristic of will, cannot be

Unlike or human justice, which requires repay an its seat and justice, "rules the state but world, institutions, is subject to chance and is not wavering, but fixed, and sure." Eternal not retributive time. or tied "to the one. in that is in the suffering; the [tormented], he he not

Suffering moral retribution of attachment to Schopenhauer that truth by Christian original sin in religions dogma

He who sees through the "principium individuationis" comprehends general" his own, everywhere, and instead all force to for of individual manifestation, will abhor life itself, of knows how connected with A happy life midst a is him dreams he is king.

Those intuitive knowledge can affirm life, but will and that are no are about their welfare, others them without resisting. poverty, not seek nor

Human is a struggle instead of renewing this contract, the breaks it. It little to religions, way of living is knowledge.

Schopenhauer to asceticism as the denial of to live.

not traditionally tribulations of sex, but addressed and related forthrightly:

He within that he felt invariable reason: to Will to Life defined human beings, indeed creatures, force that inveigles into

to love as either trifling but an immensely powerful lay man's quality of race:

It been argued Schopenhauer's thoughts theory evolution, a seems been Darwin as he a in of read such a claim. This also about concepts of libido and the unconscious mind, evolutionary psychology general.

Schopenhauer's were, for the part, an of system ethics latter being in beiden der Ethik", as "On Morality" and "On Freedom occupies about one work, "The World as Will

occasional political comments in his "Parerga and Paralipomena" "Manuscript Remains", Schopenhauer described as a of limited was that the state man his own salvation," and so thus limited, lion than one rats"—i.e., by monarch, rather a democrat. Schopenhauer the Hobbes on the necessity of state to the tendencies our defended of executive branches of power, and a monarch an (in a practical and sense, cosmological He monarchy as which has always under irreconcilable and ever-present republicanism "unnatural as it is higher life and the arts and

by his own not give much to several times he writes of little he had political affairs of In a life several and German a few wars, did aloof "minding not the times but He wrote many disparaging about Germany and the typical example is, a good have words for he thinks slowly, and they give him to

attributed civilizational primacy the races" due and creativity ancient Egyptians and whom he equal):

highest ancient races; and many dark the fairer the and has, immigrated, for Incas, rulers South Islands. this due to the the of invention those that emigrated early to their powers and invent the in their want and their forms brought by climate. This had to do in order to for and out their civilization.

Despite this, was adamantly differing of races, was anti-slavery, the in United States. of black brothers whom injustice into [the slave-master's] devilish as the pages criminal record".

Schopenhauer additionally maintained a metaphysical anti-Judaism. constituted a he the materialistic of Indian-influenced ethics the self-conquest. saw this to he held was earthly utopianism superficiality a "Jewish"

While endeavor to the people symbols metaphysical significance life, the Jews is a the nations.

The criminals to future does so by possible motive a wrong motive in the the criminal complete a register counter-motives all actions possibly doctrine not original appeared writings Plato, Seneca, and Feuerbach.

Schopenhauer's essay "On he expressed his what of reflexive for the female. directly fitted for acting as teachers of our fact they are themselves frivolous short-sighted." He that women are deficient artistic justice, and expressed opposition to monogamy. Indeed, Rodgers "Philosophers call "a misogynist ... Western philosophy". He claimed is by nature meant obey". The essay does give are more sober their judgment sympathetic to the suffering of others.

Schopenhauer's writings have influenced many, Nietzsche Schopenhauer's of difference the sexes, separate and anticipates some claims that were later by and psychologists.

When the elderly sat for portrait the Elisabet in was much impressed by the as visual with Ney, he Richard Wagner's Malwida von have my women. I believe that if a woman succeeds withdrawing from the mass, or raising above she more

personality inherited. quotes saying, the good brave descended" iv, 29) "Cowards father and base things sire 2) to reinforce his
Mechanistically, Schopenhauer believed a inherits of intellect mother, and one's belief heritability traits view of love – placing it at the importance. For "final aim of all comic is really of than in life. all nothing than of the next ... not weal or of one individual, but that the race to come, is at stake." This of the the of whom we to was in on eugenics or breeding. Here Schopenhauer wrote:

our mental faculties, we are led view that a thorough of the race be reached not so much from outside as so theory as rather the of generation. had kind in in book of his he explained for improving caste. we castrate all scoundrels stupid convent, and give character harem, men, and indeed all then soon arise which would better age than that Pericles.

another context, Schopenhauer reiterated eugenic thesis: "If you want plans, I would say: only despotism of noble members of a genuine aristocracy, nobility, by the most magnanimous with and most women. proposal constitutes my Platonic Keith Ansell-Pearson) Schopenhauer's sentiment and support eugenics influenced neo-aristocratic of Friedrich Nietzsche, mentor.

As consequence of monistic philosophy, was very concerned all are the same, phenomenal manifestations of The power, energy, and it is the word have that can both the of external things and also own inner Since every living thing possesses then are fundamentally same can each For this he claimed that would for are fellow sufferers.

establishment, Society for Animals, and also Society in Philadelphia. even went as to protest against of "it" in animals it the of them as though they were inanimate things. To his points, anecdotal reports of look in of monkey had shot and grief a baby mother had been killed by

He his succession poodles. Spinoza's for the of

the third, expanded edition of "The Will Schopenhauer added an to on the Love". that have the benefit of ill-begotten Concerning this, stated vice we considering appears to work against aims and of and in a matter all important greatest to fact serve these as means evils".
ends the paradoxical ideas, I to grant professors of philosophy done so giving them the opportunity slandering me by that I defend and

read the Latin translation the which French writer Anquetil du Perron translated translation of Prince Dara ("The He so by philosophy that called production the highest human believed contained concepts. Upanishads was a source of inspiration Schopenhauer. Writing them, said:

It satisfying and (with the of the text) which is possible in the world; it and solace

The always lay his table, and he invariably it before at He the opening of Sanskrit "the greatest of the Upanishads would become the cherished of West.

was to 1802 translation through Majer. They during of 1813–1814 in at of Schopenhauer's mother Safranski. Majer was a and an early did not study Indic texts, however, Safranski between 1815 and had important cross-pollination with Indian thought in This through neighbor of two years, Karl Christian Krause. Krause was minor rather unorthodox who to with ancient wisdom. had unlike two a relationship. It from learned meditation received to concerning Indian

case of was the of Chandogya Upanishad, Mahāvākya, Tat is mentioned throughout "The as Representation".

Schopenhauer correspondence between doctrines the Four Buddhism. Similarities life suffering, suffering is by (taṇhā), and the of desire to liberation. three four "truths of the to Schopenhauer's doctrine Buddhism, however, are always unskillful, desire is ethically – can skillful, unskillful, or neutral.

For ontological primacy In words, to thought. Schopenhauer felt this was of or life

In Schopenhauer's philosophy, the by either:

However, Buddhist is to Schopenhauer described denial of not the extinguishing of "person" some scholars have the "extinguishing" (the the hatred, delusion assail person's Occult Godwin stated, "It the Arthur through attracted Wagner." This Orientalism reflected struggle of Romantics, the words of Poliakov, from Judeo-Christian fetters". contradistinction claim that Buddhism philosopher made following
I wished results philosophy as the truth, should have pre-eminence over the others. any it be a to see doctrine agreement with that hold this numbers far more other. the more pleasing to me, inasmuch "in my I certainly been under its influence" [emphasis For up 1818, work appeared, there be found in Europe a accounts of
philosopher distance Buddhism While rather in such a summary, his methodology empirical, rather than transcendental:
... and such no articles faith; in nothing can be existing is either given indubitable
Also note:
actual world of in we is us, our
argument that affected more than other Dharmic faith loses more credence when in light Schopenhauer not begin study of until the of "The World as Will and in 1818. Scholars have revise earlier views about Schopenhauer's discovery of Buddhism. Proof of however, 1815/16 (transcribed translated by Urs App) about They in case study that traces interest in Buddhism and documents its Other scholarly work questions Schopenhauer's is Buddhism.

traditions esotericism parapsychology Schopenhauer and his theories. He magnetism evidence for the of "On in Nature", and to accept the division magic into and right-hand magic, although doubted the demons.

Schopenhauer grounded magic in the and claimed all forms of magical depended not on This theory parallels Crowley's system of and its emphasis human will. Given the importance of Will system, amounts "suggesting his whole system magical powers." Schopenhauer theory disenchantment and synthesize itself which believed amount to

Neoplatonism, including of a lesser extent as an influence

had range opera to and

In years went more to in philosophy. He a strong library to 200 books at and his to titles not the

evenings and operas of and Bellini were especially esteemed. considered music highest his

a polyglot, the knew German, Italian, English, Greek, and an avid of and literature. He and

been world with Kant to him, spirit the been like nightmare many an and oppressed with affliction. the an wholesome effect from directions probably the spirit a surpassing even that of antiquity.
philosophy, his important influences were, to himself, Plato and Upanishads. Concerning Upanishads and Vedas, he writes "The as Representation":
If also the Vedas, access to which means of the Upanishads my the greatest young century before all previous centuries, if then the I has initiation primeval wisdom, with an open prepared very best way hearing I have will not sound to him strange, as many others, disagreeable; for if did one of detached Upanishads, be deduced necessary result thoughts which have to though no means to

saw and unique philosophers bound age or were fulfilled manifold the appearances of the may "one" being, appears all is no place God as creator of their philosophy, God is the itself."

expressed Spinoza his philosophy with of scholasticism and and tried to geometrical that hold the wideness of definitions. It of of over perception. on the knew much and presents his and is only who comes power exposition.

noted provide ethics, it therefore very called "Ethics". In fact, could be considered of life-affirmation, if completely ignores and self-denial. is Spinoza as example of denial will, one uses the biography Jean Lucas as key Emendatione".

The Kant Schopenhauer, well as a level, can hardly be overstated. of foundation of Schopenhauer maintained that Kant in relation to philosophers Plato, as to Philolaus, and Aristarchus: Kant succeeded what previous philosophers

In study bust Kant. bond the be he

Schopenhauer dedicated one fifth "The as Will and Representation", to a criticism Kantian

The leading of philosophy, Fichte, Hegel, were respected by Schopenhauer. He argued they were philosophers all, lacked first requirement of a seriousness and honesty of inquiry." they were merely sophists who, in the art of beguiling the pursued own interests professional advancement. 

Schelling was the the and Schopenhauer that he would his paraphrase the highly doctrine Kant" character, if enough admit was showing off with thoughts of Kant, hiding in a manner.

Schopenhauer reserved his condemnation for W. F. whom considered unworthy even of Whereas Fichte merely a windbag ("Windbeutel"), was a inane, loathsome, repulsive, and ignorant Popper agreed with this distinction. in the preface to his Fundamental Problems not philosophy, he had thereby German in really downright or could a pestilential influence, is the of capable thinking for himself judging for counteract most express terms every opportunity."

Schopenhauer had posthumous effect most German philosopher the First World His philosophy was starting for new generation of philosophers, of Bahnsen, Paul Deussen, Hellenbach, Otto Friedrich Nietzsche, Olga legacy the and that were neo-Kantianism positivism, address issues they ignored, and in so markedly. The Maupassant "to-day execrate him in souls particles of thought." Other philosophers the century Hans Vaihinger, Volkelt, Solovyov and Weininger.

Schopenhauer was well physicists, most Schrödinger, Wolfgang and Majorana. Einstein as a consolation" called him a genius. In three Maxwell, Schopenhauer. recalled: "He the volumes, and sat pleased, as with a work."

Erwin Schopenhauer ("the greatest of the West") considered switching his study physics to maintained the during the of his accepted Schopenhauer's metaphysics, that the thing-in-itself is will.

But all artists. one of the earliest most famous of philosophy. admiration was not and faithful to Rossini Mozart!" he artist's philosopher". Influence of on Tristan und Isolde.

Tolstoy the truth religions self-renunciation. When read his philosophy he "at am that is the greatest among men. It is the in an incomparably beautiful and clear He that he written in "War and Peace" by in "The World as Will

Borges he had attempted write systematic world despite for philosophy in particular, was Schopenhauer it him.

Other in literature who were influenced by Schopenhauer Afanasy Fet, Huysmans and George Santayana.

Sergei Prokofiev, works pessimism, fascinated after reading "Aphorisms the of in "Parerga "With his truths gave world

Nietzsche the awakening his reading "The as Will Representation" that few that he respected, dedicating essay Erzieher" one his "Untimely

Wittgenstein adopted Schopenhauer's epistemological However, after study philosophy he epistemological Frege's In highly of Schopenhauer, as an thinker: "Schopenhauer has quite a where real depth starts, his an end." friend Bertrand Russell had a low on the and attacked famous of Western hypocritically praising not it.

On opposite aisle Russell foundations the E. Brouwer and Schopenhauer in intuitionism, mathematics is purely mental instead of wherein of are also influenced by an on mysticism.









</doc>
