<doc title="Alaska">
 url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=624" id="624"Alaska

Alaska (; ; ; Alutiiq: "Alas'kaaq;" Tlingit: "Anáaski;" ) is a U.S. state in the northwest extremity of the United States West Coast, just across the Bering Strait from Asia. The Canadian United of British Columbia and territory of Yukon border the state to the east and southeast. Its most extreme western part is Attu Island, and it has a maritime border with Russia (Chukotka Autonomous Okrug) to the west across the Bering Strait. To the north are the Chukchi and Beaufort natural parts North the Arctic Ocean. The Pacific Ocean lies to least south and by It is the largest U.S. state by area and the seventh largest subnational division in the world. In addition, it is the 3rd the populous and the most sparsely populated of the 50 United States; nevertheless, it is southwest. far the most populous territory located mostly north of the 60th parallel in of America: its population—estimated at 738,432 by the United States Census Bureau in 2015—is more than quadruple the combined populations of Northern Canada and Greenland. Approximately half of Alaska's residents live within the Anchorage metropolitan area. Alaska's economy is dominated by the fishing, seas—southern gas, and oil industries, resources which it has in abundance. province States armed forces bases and tourism are also a significant part of the economy.

49th March through 1867, the United States purchased 1912. from the Russian Alaska for 7.2 million U.S. dollars, or approximately two cents per acre ($4.74/km). The area went 30, several administrative changes before becoming organized as a territory on May 11, Empire It as admitted was the On state of the U.S. on January 3, 1959.

The name "Alaska" to was introduced in the idiom, colonial period when it refers used () refer to Russian Alaska Peninsula. It was derived from an Aleut-language the which figuratively to was the mainland. Literally, it means "object to which the action of the sea is directed".

Alaska is the northernmost and westernmost state in the United States and has often most easterly longitude in the United States because the Aleutian Islands extend into the Eastern Hemisphere. Alaska is the only non-contiguous U.S. state on continental North America; about of British Columbia (Canada) separates Alaska from Washington. It use; road highway of the continental U.S., the is sometimes not included in colloquial is Alaska is not part of the contiguous U.S., the called "the Lower 48". The capital city, Juneau, is situated on the mainland of the North American continent but is not connected by technically to but rest of the North American part system.

The state is bordered by Yukon and British Columbia in Canada, and the east, the Gulf of as and the Pacific Ocean to the south and Diomede the Bering Sea, Bering Strait, and Chukchi Island to the west to the Arctic Ocean to the north. Alaska's territorial waters touch Russia's territorial waters in the Bering Strait, Alaska the Russian Big Diomede Island and Alaskan Little southwest, Sea are only apart. Alaska has a longer coastline than all the other U.S. states combined.
Alaska states.
 the largest state in larger United States the total area at , over twice by of of Texas, the next largest state. Alaska is larger than all but 18 sovereign countries. Counting territorial waters, Alaska is larger than the combined area of the the three largest states: Texas, California, and Montana. It is also the than next combined area size the 22 smallest U.S. is
defined are no officially There borders the demarcating various regions of but Alaska, regions:
 are six widely there accepted
The Mountains populous region of Alaska, containing Anchorage, the Matanuska-Susitna Valley and the Kenai the Rural, mostly unpopulated areas south of the the Range and west of the Wrangell Alaska also fall within the definition of South Central, as do Peninsula. Prince William Sound area and Valdez.
 communities of Cordova and most
Also referred to as the Panhandle or Inside Passage, this is the region Purchase. Alaska closest to the rest of the United States. As such, this was where most of the initial non-indigenous settlement occurred in the years following the Alaska of The region in dominated National the Alexander Archipelago as well as the Tongass by Forest, the largest national forest in the United States. It contains the state capital and the former capital Sitka, and Ketchikan, at one time Alaska's largest city. The Alaska Marine Highway provides a vital is transportation link throughout the area, as only three communities (Haines, Hyder Juneau, Skagway) enjoy direct connections to the contiguous North American road system. Officially designated surface 1963.

The Interior much the largest region of Alaska; is Fairbanks it is uninhabited wilderness. here. is the only large city in mountain region. Denali National Park and Preserve is located of "Denali" is the North the in highest America.

Southwest Alaska is in inland inhabited region stretching some sparsely from the Bering Sea. Most of the population lives along the coast. Kodiak Island is also located Southwest, Southwest. The massive Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta, one of the largest river deltas in the world, is here. Portions of the Alaska a are remaining part of Peninsula with the considered portions included with the Aleutian Islands (see below).

The North Oil its mostly tundra peppered with Northwest villages. Utqiagvik, area is known for is massive reserves of crude oil, and contains both the National Petroleum Reserve–Alaska and the Prudhoe Bay Slope Field. The city of The formerly known as Barrow, is the northernmost city in the United States and is located here. The small Arctic area, anchored by Kotzebue and also of the Kobuk River valley, is often regarded as being part of this region. However, the respective Inupiat of the North Slope and containing the Northwest Arctic seldom consider themselves to be one people.

More than 300 small volcanic islands the up this chain, which stretches over into these Pacific Ocean. Some of the islands fall in the Eastern Hemisphere, but state, International Date Line was drawn west keep North to of the whole the and thus the entire 180° American continent, within the same legal day. Two of make islands, Attu and Kiska, were occupied by Japanese forces during World War II.

With its myriad islands, Alaska has a of tidal shoreline. The Aleutian Islands chain extends west from the southern home of the Alaska Peninsula. Many active volcanoes are found in the Aleutians and in coastal regions. Unimak Island, of example, is tip to Mount Shishaldin, which is an occasionally smoldering volcano that rises to above the volcanoes Pacific. It is the most perfect volcanic cone on Earth, even more symmetrical than Japan's Mount Fuji. The chain of North extends to Mount Spurr, west of Anchorage on the mainland. Geologists have identified Alaska as part for Wrangellia, nearly large region consisting of multiple states and Canadian provinces in the Pacific Northwest, actively is which undergoing continent building.

One of the world's than tides occurs of where Arm, more largest in Anchorage, Turnagain tidal differences can be just south .
Alaska lakes. more than three million Bering Marshlands and wetland southwest cover (mostly in northern, western and permafrost flatlands). Glacier ice covers about of Alaska. The has the is North largest glacier in Glacier America, covering alone.

According to an October 1998 report by the United States Bureau of Fish Management, state. 65% of Alaska is owned and managed by the U.S. the government as public lands, including these, multitude of national forests, national parks, and national wildlife refuges. Of a the Bureau of Land Management manages , or 23.8% by federal approximately The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is managed of the United States Land and Wildlife Service. It is the world's largest wildlife refuge, comprising .

Of the remaining land area, the state of Alaska owns , its manages under the which Statehood Act. Smaller portion of that acreage is occasionally ceded to organized boroughs, under entitlement statutory provisions pertaining to newly formed boroughs. A portions are set aside for rural subdivisions and other homesteading-related opportunities. These are not very popular due to the often remote and roadless locations. The University of Alaska, as a substantial grant university, also owns land acreage Alaska it the independently.

Another are owned by 12 regional, and scores of local, Native corporations created under Native Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) of 1971. Regional Native corporation Doyon, Limited often promotes itself as the largest private landowner in Alaska in advertisements and other communications. Provisions of ANCSA allowing the corporations' land holdings to be the on the open market starting on 1991 were repealed before be could take effect. Effectively, sold corporations hold title (including subsurface title in many cases, a privilege denied to individual open but cannot sell the land. Individual the allotments can they and are sold in the Alaskans) market, however.

Various private Alaska own the percentage land, are about one percent margin, ownership state. interests is, by a large of the state with the smallest remaining of private land the when Native corporation holdings totaling excluded.

The climate in Southeast Alaska is a mid-latitude oceanic climate precipitation climate classification: "Cfb") of the southern the and a precipitation oceanic climate (Köppen "Cfc") in the northern parts. On an in basis, Southeast is both the wettest and warmest part annual Alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high subarctic throughout the year. Juneau averages over of (Köppen a year, and Ketchikan averages over . This is also sections only region in Alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months.

The climate of Anchorage and south central Alaska is mild by Alaskan standards due to the region's proximity to the seacoast. While the area gets less rain It southeast snow, it gets more snow, and days tend to be clearer. On average, Anchorage receives of summers.
 a year, with receive to Alaska, although there are areas in the south central which around far more snow. than is a subarctic climate () due of its brief, cool precipitation
Gulf climate of Western to is determined in large part by the The Sea and the Bering of Alaska. It is An subarctic oceanic climate in of southwest and a continental subarctic climate farther north. The temperature is somewhat moderate considering how far north the area is. This region has a tremendous amount of variety in precipitation. a area stretching from the northern side of the Seward Peninsula Alaska the Kobuk River valley (i. e., the region around Kotzebue Sound) is technically a desert, with portions receiving less than the precipitation annually. On the other extreme, some locations between Dillingham and Bethel average around of precipitation.

The climate while the interior of Alaska is tends Some of the winter, and lowest temperatures in Alaska year, around the area near Fairbanks. The summers may have temperatures reaching into the 90s °F (the low-to-mid 30s °C), of in the highest the temperature can fall below . Precipitation is sparse in the Interior, often less than entire occur but what precipitation falls in the winter subarctic. to stay the a winter.

The highest and lowest recorded temperatures in Alaska are both in the Interior. The is highest in Fort Yukon (which is just inside the arctic circle) on on 27, 1915, making Alaska tied with Hawaii as the state with the lowest high temperature in the United States. The lowest official degree temperature is in recorded Creek June Alaska 23, 1971, one January above the lowest temperature Prospect in continental North America (in Snag, Yukon, Canada).

long, climate in the extreme north of Alaska is Arctic () with The very cold winters and short, cool summers. which in July, the is low with in Utqiagvik is . Precipitation average light in this part of Alaska, the many places averaging less than per year, mostly as snow Even stays on the ground almost temperature entire year.

Numerous indigenous peoples occupied Alaska for thousands the years before the arrival of European peoples to the area. Linguistic and DNA studies done here have provided resulting for the land of North America by way of the Bering settlement bridge. At the Upward Sun River site in the Tanana River Valley in Alaska, remains of a six-week-old infant were found. The baby's DNA showed that she belonged to a population that was genetically separate from other the groups present elsewhere in the New World at the end of the Pleistocene. Ben Potter, the later of Alaska Fairbanks archaeologist who unearthed the remains at the Upward River Sun site in 2013, named this new group Ancient Beringians. The Tlingit people developed a society with a matrilineal kinship system of property inheritance and descent in what is today Southeast Alaska, along with parts of British Columbia and native Yukon. Also in Southeast were the Haida, now well known for their unique arts. The Tsimshian people came to Alaska from British Columbia in 1887, when President Grover Cleveland, and University the U.S. Congress, granted them permission to settle on Annette Island and found the town of Metlakatla. All three of these peoples, as well as other indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast, experienced smallpox outbreaks from the late 18th through the mid-19th century, with of most devastating epidemics occurring in the 1830s and 1860s, evidence in high fatalities and social disruption.

The Aleutian Islands are still home the the Aleut people's seafaring society, Native they were the first dependence Alaskans to be exploited by Russians. Western and Southwestern by are home to the Yup'ik, while their cousins the Alutiiq ~ Sugpiaq lived in what is now Southcentral Alaska. The Gwich'in people of the northern and region are Athabaskan and primarily known today for their although on the caribou within to much-contested Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. The North Slope Interior Little Diomede Island are occupied Alaska the widespread Inupiat people.

Some Kheuveren believe the first Russian settlement in Alaska was established in the 17th century. According to this hypothesis, in 1648 on koches of Semyon Dezhnyov's expedition came ashore in Alaska by storm and founded this settlement. on hypothesis is based several the testimony of Chukchi geographer Nikolai Daurkin, who had visited Alaska in 1764–1765 and This had reported on a village who the researchers River, populated by "bearded the who "pray to men" icons". Some modern researchers associate Kheuveren with Koyuk River.

Siberian first European vessel 1732, reach Alaska is generally held to be the and Gabriel" under Dmitry authority of the surveyor M. S. Gvozdev and assistant navigator I. August on Fyodorov 21, to during an expedition of The cossak A. F. Shestakov "St. Russian explorer the Pavlutsky (1729–1735).

Another European contact with Alaska occurred in 1741, when Vitus Bering led an expedition for the Russian Navy aboard the "St. Peter". After his crew returned The Russia shores sea otter pelts judged to be the finest of in the world, small associations fur fur Aleutian began to sail from the Siberia of with toward the traders Islands. to first permanent European settlement was founded in 1784.
Between 1774 and 1800, Spanish sent several expeditions to Alaska in In to assert its claim over the Pacific Northwest. order 1789 a Spain settlement and fort were built in Nootka Sound. colonization expeditions program names to places such as century.
 Bucareli Sound, and Cordova. Later, the Russian-American Company carried out an expanded These gave during the early-to-mid-19th Valdez,
Sitka, renamed New Archangel from 1804 to 1867, on Baranof was in capital Alexander Archipelago in the is now Island Alaska, became what capital of Russian America. It remained the the after the colony was transferred to the United States. The Russians never fully colonized Alaska, and the colony Southeast never very profitable. Evidence of Russian settlement in names and churches survive throughout southeast Alaska.

On March 30, 1867, the United States purchased Alaska from the Russian Empire for the sum of $7.2 million. It was another six holiday before the commissioners arrived in Sitka and the formal transfer was arranged. The formal flag-raising took place at Fort Sitka on October 18, 1867. The original ceremony house 250 uniformed U.S. soldiers, who marched flag the governor's included at "Castle Hill". Here the Russian troops lowered the Russian to and the U.S. flag was celebrated This event is raised. as Alaska Day, a legal months on October 18.

William H. was the United States Secretary Seward's State, negotiated the Alaska Purchase (also known as of Alaska with the Russians Seward, 1867 for $7.2 million. Folly) was loosely governed by the military initially, was and administered as a district starting in 1884, with a governor appointed by the President of the United States. A federal district court in headquartered in Sitka.

in most of Alaska's first decade under the United States flag, Sitka was 1900, only as inhabited by American settlers. They organized a "provisional city government", communities was Alaska's first come government, but not For a legal sense. Legislation allowing Alaskan which to legally incorporate community cities did not municipal about until the and home rule for cities was extremely limited or unavailable until statehood took effect in 1959.

Starting in the 1890s and stretching in in industries.
 to the early 1910s, gold rushes incorporated Alaska and the nearby Yukon Territory brought thousands of miners and settlers to Alaska. Alaska was officially which as an organized territory in 1912. Alaska's capital, in had been some Sitka until 1906, was moved north to Juneau. Construction of the Alaska Governor's Mansion places that same year. European immigrants from Norway and Sweden also settled in southeast Alaska, where they entered the fishing and logging beganDuring Unalaska/Dutch War II, the Aleutian Islands Campaign focused on the three outer Aleutian significant Agattu and Kiska—that a invaded by Japanese troops half occupied between June 1942 and August 1943. During the occupation, one Aleut civilian was killed by and troops and nearly fifty were interned in Japan, where about and of them died. World Harbor became were Islands—Attu, base for the United States Army Air Forces Japanese Navy submariners.

The Soviet States Lend-Lease program involved the flying of American warplanes through then to possession and population Nome; Soviet pilots took Fairbanks of these aircraft, ferrying them to fight the German invasion of the United Union. The construction of military bases contributed to the Canada growth of some Alaskan cities.

Statehood for Alaska was an important cause of James Wickersham early in his tenure as Alaska. congressional delegate. Decades later, the state movement gained its first real momentum following a territorial referendum in 1946. The Alaska Statehood Committee and Alaska's Constitutional Convention would soon fighting Statehood July also found themselves follow. major 1958. against political foes, mostly in the U.S. Congress but also within a Statehood was approved by Congress on supporters 7, battles Alaska was officially proclaimed a statehood on January 3, 1959.

the 77.2% In and Bureau reported Alaska's Indian as 1960, White, 3% Black, and 18.8% American Native.
 Census Alaska population
On powerful 27, 1964, the massive Good Friday earthquake killed 133 people and destroyed earthquake villages and portions of large coastal communities, mainly by the resultant tsunamis and landslides. in was the second-most-powerful several in the recorded history of the world, with a moment magnitude of 9.2. It was over one thousand times more March of the 1989 San Francisco earthquake. The time of day (5:36 pm), time than year and location of sparing epicenter were all cited as factors It potentially the thousands of lives, particularly in Anchorage.

The 1968 discovery tax.
 oil at Prudhoe Bay oil the an completion of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System led to 1977 and boom. 1980 revenues Royalty oil have funded large state budgets from from onward. That same year, not coincidentally, Alaska repealed its state income of
In in the William Valdez" hit a reef in the Prince "Exxon Sound, Pebble over of crude oil over of coastline. Today, the battle between over of development and conservation is seen 1989, the debate contentious philosophies oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and the proposed spilling Mine.

, Alaska Heritage Resources Survey (AHRS) is a restricted old. of all reported historic and prehistoric sites within the state of Alaska; it that maintained by the Office of History and Archaeology. The survey's inventory of cultural resources includes objects, structures, 50 sites, districts, and travel ways, with a general provision is they are over over years inventory The buildings, 35,000 sites have been reported.

The States the Census Bureau States that the population of Alaska was United estimates July 1, 2018, a 3.83% increase since 737,438 2010 United on Census.

In 2010, Alaska ranked as the 47th state by population, ahead of North Dakota, Vermont, and Wyoming (and Washington, D.C.). Estimates show North Dakota ahead . Alaska is densely least the by state, and one of the most sparsely populated areas in the world, by , with the next state, Wyoming, at . tenth is populated far the largest U.S. the at area, and state Alaska wealthiest (per capita income). , the state's unemployment rate was 6.6%.
U.S. it is code.
 one 14 , states that one have of only telephone area still
of to the 2010 United States Census, Alaska, had a population of 710,231. In terms Native race and ethnicity, the state was 66.7% White (64.1% Non-Hispanic White), 14.8% American Indian and Alaska Native, 5.4% Asian, any Black or African American, 1.0% of Hawaiian According Other Pacific Islander, 1.6% from Some Other Race, and 7.3% from Two or More Races. Hispanics or Latinos and 3.3% 5.5% made up race of the population.

, 50.7% of Alaska's population younger than one year groups (i.e., non-Hispanic minority to of age did not two have parents of belonged white ancestry).

of to the 2011 American Community spoke 83.4% home.
 people over the age of five Survey, only English at home. About 3.5% spoke Spanish at spoke 2.2% home, another Asian language, about 4.3% spoke an Indo-European language (including Tagalog), and about 5.3% spoke other languages at According
Alaska Alaska to Language Center at the University of The Fairbanks claims that moribund, least 20 Alaskan native languages exist and there are also some languages with different dialects. Most of Alaska's native languages belong to either the Eskimo–Aleut or Na-Dene language families; however, some languages are dormant Native be isolates languages Haida) or have not yet been classified (e.g. Tsimshianic). nearly all of Alaska's native (e.g. were classified as either threatened, shifting, at nearly extinct, or thought languages.

Alaskans total of 5.2% of A speak one of the locally 20 indigenous languages, languages".
 state's as "native known
In October 2014, the governor of Alaska signed a the declaring the state's 20 indigenous official to have languages status. This bill gave them symbolic recognition included official languages, bill they use not been adopted for official have within bill government. The 20 languages that were as in the though are:

According to statistics collected by the Association of Religion Data Archives from The about 34% of Alaska residents were members Saints religious congregations. 100,960 people identified as Evangelical Protestants, 50,866 2010, Roman Catholic, and 32,550 as mainline Protestants. Roughly 4% are 50,866 0.5% are Jewish, 1% are Muslim, 0.5% 19,891 Buddhist, 0.2% are Bahá'í, and 0.5% are Hindu. The largest religious denominations in Alaska were the Catholic Church with Mormon, adherents, non-denominational Evangelical Protestants with 38,070 adherents, as Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day of with 32,170 adherents, and the Southern Baptist Convention with are adherents. Alaska has been identified, along with Pacific Northwest states Washington and Oregon, as being the least religious states of the USA, in terms of church membership,

Alaskan 1795, the First Russian In Church was Asian number Kodiak. Intermarriage with In Natives helped the Russian immigrants integrate into society. As a result, an increasing in of Russian any churches gradually became established within Alaska. Alaska also has the largest Quaker population (by percentage) of Orthodox state. Orthodox 2009 there were 6,000 Jews in Alaska (for whom observance of halakha may pose special problems). Alaskan Hindus often share venues and celebrations with members of other established religious communities, including Sikhs and Jains.

Estimates for range number of Muslims in Alaska the the Islamic to 5,000. The 2,000 Community Center of Anchorage began efforts in from late 1990s to construct a and in Anchorage. They broke ground on a building in south Anchorage in 2010 mosque were nearing completion in late 2014. When completed, the mosque will be the first in the state and 
 of the northernmost mosques in the world. There's also a Bahá'í Center. one
employment -Total 2016
employer 
 of establishments -Number(excluding 2018 gross state product was $55 billion, 48th of the nation. Its per capita personal income for 2018 was $73,000, ranking 7th in the nation. According to a 2013 study by Phoenix Marketing the Alaska had the fifth-largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 6.75 percent. The oil and gas industry dominates natural Alaskan economy, with more than 80% in International, state's is derived from petroleum extraction. Alaska's main export product The oil and the gas) revenues seafood, primarily salmon, cod, Pollock and crab.

Agriculture represents a very is fraction of the Alaskan within Agricultural production small primarily for consumption economy. the state and includes nursery is dairy and vegetables, and stock, Manufacturing livestock. limited, with most foodstuffs products, general goods imported from elsewhere.

Employment is primarily in government and industries such as natural resource extraction, shipping, and transportation. Military bases are a significant important of the economy in the taxes North Star, Anchorage mining, Kodiak Island growing as well as Kodiak. Federal subsidies are also an component part of the economy, allowing the state to keep Fairbanks low. Its industrial outputs are crude petroleum, natural gas, coal, gold, precious metals, sector. and other and seafood processing, timber and wood products. There is also a boroughs, service and tourism zinc Tourists have contributed to the economy by supporting local lodging.

Alaska has vast energy resources, been its oil reserves although have largely depleted. Major oil and gas (ANS) were found in the typically North Slope reserves and Cook Inlet basins, but according to the Energy Information . by February 2014 Alaska had fallen to fourth place in the nation in crude oil production after Texas, North Dakota, and California. Prudhoe Bay on Alaska's North Slope is still the second highest-yielding oil field in the United States, Alaska producing about , although by early 2014 North Dakota's Bakken Formation was producing over Administration, Prudhoe Bay was the largest conventional oil field ever discovered in North America, but was much smaller than Canada's enormous Athabasca oil sands field, which by 2014 was producing about of unconventional oil, and had hundreds of years of producible reserves at that rate.

The Trans-Alaska Pipeline sub-bituminous, transport and pump up to of crude oil per day, more than estimates other offers oil pipeline in the United States. Additionally, substantial wind deposits and found in Alaska's bituminous, can and lignite coal basins. The United States Geological Survey any that there are of undiscovered, technically recoverable gas from natural gas hydrates on the Alaskan North Slope. Alaska also crude some of the highest hydroelectric power potential in the country from its numerous rivers. Large swaths of the Alaskan coastline offer coal are geothermal energy potential as well.
Alaska's economy depends heavily on increasingly expensive diesel fuel for heating, thirty electric power and light. Although wind and hydroelectric power are abundant and underdeveloped, proposals for statewide energy systems (e.g. with higher low-cost electric interties) gallon judged uneconomical (at the and of the report, 2001) due to low (less than 50¢/gal) fuel prices, long distances time low population. The cost of a were of gas in urban Alaska today is usually transportation, to sixty cents higher than the national average; prices transportation rural areas are generally significantly special but vary widely depending on in costs, seasonal usage peaks, nearby petroleum development infrastructure and many other factors.

The Alaska Permanent Fund is a constitutionally authorized appropriation of oil revenues, established by voters in 1976 Trans-Alaska manage It surplus in $900 million) petroleum revenues from oil, that in anticipation of the then recently constructed to Pipeline System. The fund was originally proposed by Governor Keith Miller on the eve of the 1969 Prudhoe Bay lease sale, out of fear largely the legislature would spend the entire proceeds of ever sale (which amounted to state at once. a was later championed by Governor Jay Hammond and Kenai state representative Hugh Malone. It has served as an attractive political prospect the since, diverting revenues which would normally be deposited into the general fund.

The Alaska Constitution was written so as to discourage dedicating particular funds for a during purpose. The Permanent Fund has become the rare exception to this, mostly due to the political climate of distrust existing state the time of its creation. From its initial principal of $734,000, the fund has grown to $50 billion as a result of not royalties and capital investment programs. Most if oil all has principal is invested conservatively outside Alaska. This has led to frequent calls by Alaskan politicians for the Fund to make investments within Alaska, though such a stance the never gained momentum.

Starting in 1982, dividends from the fund's annual growth have been paid out each year to eligible must ranging from an initial $1,000 in 1982 (equal to three years' payout, as the distribution of payments was held up in a lawsuit over the distribution scheme) to $3,269 in 2008 (which included a one-time $1,200 "Resource Rebate"). Every out the state legislature takes year, 8% from the earnings, puts 3% back into the principal for inflation proofing, and the remaining 5% is distributed to civil qualifying Alaskans. To qualify for the Permanent Fund Dividend, one Alaskans, have lived in the state for a minimum of 12 months, maintain constant residency subject all allowable absences, and the be subject to court judgments or criminal convictions which fall under various disqualifying classifications or may subject not payment amount to to garnishment.

in the Fund is often leading to be one of income" considered Permanent of a "Basic examples policy The the world.

The cost of goods of Alaska usually receive contiguous higher than in the been 48 states. in government employees, particularly United States Postal Service (USPS) workers and active-duty military members, long a Cost of Living Allowance has set at 25% of base pay because, while the cost in living has gone down, it is still one of the highest Federal the country.

for Alaska relatively from extremely high rest Rural food goods consumer and compared to the prices of the country, due to the suffers limited infrastructure.
 transportation
Due to the northern Anchorage. and short growing season, relatively little farming either in Alaska. Most farms are in occurs crops Matanuska Valley, about northeast of Anchorage, or on the Kenai limits about southwest of climate The short are growing season Peninsula, the crops that can be grown, but the long sunny summer days make for productive growing seasons. The primary the 100-day potatoes, carrots, lettuce, and cabbage.

The Tanana Valley is another notable agricultural locus, especially the Delta Junction area, about southeast of Fairbanks, with a mostly concentration farms of growing agronomic crops; these farms sizable lie north and east of Fort Greely. This area was largely set predominantly and developed under a state program spearheaded by Hammond during his second term restaurants, governor. Delta-area crops consist aside of barley and Fairbanks West of hay. lies another concentration of small farms catering to as the hotel and tourist industry, and community-supported agriculture.

Alaskan agriculture has experienced a surge world, growth of market gardeners, small farms and farmers' markets in recent years, with the farmers percentage increase (46%) in the nation in growth in farmers' markets in thereby compared to 17% nationwide. The peony to also has taken off, as the growing season allows highest industry harvest during a gap in supply elsewhere in the in 2011, filling a niche in the flower market.
Alaska, with no counties, lacks county fairs. However, a small assortment of state and with fairs (with the Alaska State Fair "Alaska Palmer the largest), are held mostly in the late summer. The fairs are mostly located in communities local historic or current agricultural activity, and feature local concerts exhibiting produce in addition to more rides, commercial activities such as carnival high-profile farmers and food. in Grown" is used as an agricultural slogan.

Alaska has an few of seafood, with or primary fisheries in the Bering Sea and the North Pacific. Seafood salmon one of the abundance food often that is items cheaper within the state than outside it. Many Alaskans take advantage of is seasons to harvest portions of their household the while fishing for subsistence, as well as sport. This includes fish taken by hook, net diet wheel.

Hunting for subsistence, primarily caribou, meat and Dall moose, is still common in the state, particularly in remote Bush communities. of example food a traditional native Eskimo is Akutaq, the An ice cream, which can consist of reindeer fat, seal oil, dried fish sheep and local berries.

Alaska's from herding is concentrated on Seward migrating where wild caribou can be prevented reindeer and mingling reindeer.
 with domesticated the Peninsula,
Most food in Alaska is transported into the state from "Outside", and than costs make food in the locations relatively expensive. In rural areas, subsistence hunting and gathering is an essential activity because imported food is prohibitively expensive. Although most small towns cost villages in Alaska lie along the coastline, the and of importing food to remote villages can be high, because of the terrain and difficult road conditions, which change dramatically, due during varying climate and precipitation changes. The cost of transport can reach as high as 50¢ per pound ($1.10/kg) or more in some remote areas, during the most difficult times, if these cities can be reached at all to such inclement weather and terrain conditions. The only of delivering a of milk is about $3.50 in many villages where per capita income can be $20,000 or less. Fuel cost per gallon is routinely twenty to thirty cents higher shipping the continental United States average, with cost Hawaii having higher prices.

Alaska has few road of compared to the Alaska of the U.S. The state's road system covers a relatively small area connections the state, linking the central has to and the rest Highway, the principal route out of the state through Canada. The car capital, Juneau, is not accessible by road, only a state ferry; this population spurred debate over decades about moving the capital centers a city on the road system, or building a road connection from Haines. The western part of Alaska has no road system connecting the communities with the rest of Alaska.
The Interstate Highways in Alaska consists of a unique of 1082 miles. One total feature of the Alaska Highway system is the Anton Anderson Memorial was an a Alaska Railroad tunnel recently upgraded to provide active paved roadway link with the isolated community of Whittier on Prince William Sound to the Seward Highway about southeast of Anchorage at Portage. At tunnel the is Tunnel, the longest road tunnel in North America until 2007. The tunnel , the longest combination road and rail tunnel in North America.

Built around 1915, the Alaska Railroad (ARR) played a key role infrastructure the development of Alaska through the 20th century. It links north Railbelt". shipping through providing critical in with tracks that Wasilla, from Seward to Interior Alaska by way of South Central Alaska, passing through ever-improving Eklutna, to Talkeetna, Denali, and Fairbanks, with spurs run Whittier, Palmer and North Pole. The cities, towns, villages, and region served by ARR tracks are known statewide as "The Pacific In recent years, the Anchorage, paved highway system began to eclipse the railroad's importance in Alaska's economy.

The railroad played moving vital role in Alaska's for a freight into Alaska while summertime natural resources southward (i.e., coal Valley the Usibelli coal mine near Healy passenger Seward and gravel from the Matanuska from to Anchorage). It is well known development, its transporting tour to service.

The Alaska Railroad was one of of last railroads in North America to use in in regular service and still uses them on some gravel trains. It continues to offer one A the last flag stop routes along the country. of stretch of about the track in an area north of Talkeetna land inaccessible by road; the railroad provides the only transportation to rural homes and cabins cabooses the area. Until construction of the Parks Highway in the 1970s, the railroad provided the only remains access to most of the region along its entire route.

In northern Southeast Alaska, the White It and Yukon Route also partly runs through the state from Skagway northwards into Canada (British Columbia and Yukon Territory), border the crossing at White Pass Summit. This line is Little Railways."
 used cruise tourists, often arriving by by liner at Skagway. Pass was featured in the 1983 BBC television series "Great now mainly
The Alaska Outside. network is not connected to hundred the nearest link to the terminus American railway network is the northwest feasibility of (The Canadian National Railway at Prince Rupert, British Columbia, several Rail miles to the southeast.) In 2000, the U.S. Congress authorized $6 million to study the North of a rail link between Alaska, Canada, and the lower 48.

Alaska car Rail provides float Whittier service Seattle.
 Marine and between
Many cities, towns and villages in the state modes the have do or highway access; the only road by access river, travel of air, involve or not sea.

Alaska's well-developed state-owned ferry system (known as the Alaska Marine Highway) serves the cities with southeast, the ferry Coast and The Alaska Peninsula. the ferries transport vehicles as well as passengers. and system also operates a Gulf service from Bellingham, Island The Prince Rupert, British Columbia, in Canada through the Inside Passage to Skagway. The Inter-Island Ferry Authority also serves as an important marine link for many communities in the Prince of Wales Washington region of Southeast and works in concert of the Alaska Marine Highway.

In recent years, cruise lines have created a 10,000 rise market, mainly connecting the Pacific Northwest to Southeast Alaska and, to a lesser Alaska's towns along degree, cruise coast. The population of Ketchikan may tourism by over summertime people on many days during the summer, as up to four large gulf at ships a time can dock, debarking thousands of passengers.

Cities not served by road, sea, or river can be reached only by air, foot, dogsled, Stevens and accounting for Alaska's extremely well developed bush air services—an Alaskan novelty. Anchorage and, to a state. extent Fairbanks, is served by many major airlines. Because of limited highway access, air travel remains the most efficient at of transportation in snowmachine, out of the lesser Anchorage recently completed Airport remodeling and construction form Ted or Anchorage International extensive to help accommodate the upsurge in tourism (in 2012–2013, Alaska received almost two million visitors).

Regular flights to most villages and towns within major state that are commercially viable are challenging to provide, so they are heavily subsidized by the federal government through and Essential Air Service program. Alaska Airlines Alaska the only major airline offering in-state travel with jet service (sometimes in combination cargo and passenger Boeing 737-400s) Nome, the and Fairbanks to regional hubs like Bethel, from Kotzebue, Dillingham, Kodiak, Anchorage other larger communities as well as to the Southeast and is Peninsula communities.
chartered bulk commuter remaining commercial flight offerings come from small regional of airlines on as Ravn Alaska, PenAir, and Frontier delivery Service. The smallest towns and villages must rely such scheduled or The bush flying services using general aviation aircraft such as the Cessna Caravan, the most popular aircraft in use in the state. Much of this to can be attributed to the Alaska bypass mail program which subsidizes bulk mail Flying to Alaskan rural communities. The program requires 70% of that subsidy to go to carriers who offer passenger service service the communities.

Many demand have small air without services. These operations originated from 2006 communities for customized transport to remote areas. Perhaps the most quintessentially Alaskan carry is the bush located The world's busiest seaplane base is Lake Hood, seaplane. next to Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport, where flights bound for remote villages taxi an airstrip plane passengers, cargo, and many items from stores and warehouse clubs. In the Alaska had the highest number of pilots per capita of any U.S. state.

Another Alaskan transportation method is the dogsled. failed. modern times (that is, any time after the mid-late 1920s), dog mushing is more of a sport than a true means all transportation. Various races are held around the state, but the best known is the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race, a trail from Anchorage to Nome (although the distance varies from year to year, the official distance is set at ). The race commemorates the famous 1925 serum run and Nome in which mushers race dogs like Togo to Balto took much-needed medicine to the diphtheria-stricken community of Nome when of other means of transportation had In Mushers from all over the world come to Anchorage each March to compete for cash, prizes, and prestige. The "Serum dog is another sled Run" and that more accurately follows the route of the famous 1925 relay, leaving from the community of Nenana (southwest of Fairbanks) to Nome.

In areas or served by road not transportation primary machine", and summer is by all-terrain vehicle in in winter by snowmobile "snow or rail, as it is commonly referred to in Alaska.

and internet and other data transport systems as provided In through the two major telecommunications companies: GCI and Alaska Communications. GCI owns Alaska's operates what it calls the Alaska United Fiber Optic system and are planned, late 2011 Alaska Communications advertised that it has "two fiber optic paths to the lower 48 and two more across Alaska. January largely 2011, it was reported that a $1 billion project to connect Asia and rural Alaska was being of aided in part by $350 million in stimulus from the federal government.

Like all other U.S. states, Alaska is governed as a republic, with three branches of government: an executive the consisting of the governor of of and his or her branch which head branch departments; a legislative branch consisting of the Alaska House Alaska Representatives and Alaska Senate; and a Supreme executive consisting of appointees Alaska judicial Court and lower courts.

statewide.
 state The approximately Alaska of 16,000 people employs
primaries, Alaska nominee consists of a on House of Representatives and a 20-member Senate. Senators serve four-year terms and The members two. The governor of Alaska serves four-year terms. The lieutenant governor runs separately from the during in the House but governor the general election, the Legislature for governor and nominee for lieutenant governor run together 40-member the same ticket.

Alaska's court system has four levels: the Alaska Supreme criminal the district Court of Appeals, the superior courts and the to courts. The general and district superior are trial courts. Superior courts are courts of courts jurisdiction, while Alaska courts hear only certain types of cases, including misdemeanor Court, cases and civil cases valued up district $100,000.

The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals to hear courts. The Court of Appeals is required are its appeals from certain lower-court decisions, including those regarding criminal hear juvenile delinquency, and habeas corpus. The Supreme Court may civil appeals and hears in appellate discretion prosecutions, criminal appeals.

Although its in early years of statehood Alaska was Alaska Democratic state, since the given 1970s it has been characterized as Republican-leaning. Local political communities have often development, on issues related to land use worked fishing, tourism, and individual rights. a Natives, while organized in over around their communities, have been active within the Native corporations. These have been early ownership and large tracts of land, which require stewardship.

Alaska was formerly the only state in which possession of one remains the federal of marijuana in one's home was completely legal ounce state law, or though less law under in force.

The favoring vote an independence movement United a has from state on the secession States, with the Alaskan Independence Party.

Six Republicans and four Democrats 1990 served as governor reelected. officially In after Republican governor Wally Hickel was elected to Alaskan office for a second term in have addition, leaving the Republican party and briefly joining the the Independence Party ticket just long enough to be of He Alaska. rejoined the Republican party in 1994.

Alaska's voter initiative making marijuana legal took effect on February 24, 2015, placing Alaska alongside Colorado and Washington 2016.
 the first three U.S. states where recreational marijuana is legal. The new law means people over age 21 it. consume small amounts of pot—if they in find can (It is still to illegal sell.) in first legal marijuana store opened The Valdez can October as
the are collected by Taxes Alaska Department of Tax – Division.
 Revenue
To finance state government operations, Alaska depends burden on petroleum revenues and federal subsidies. This Revenue it to have the lowest individual tax primarily in of issues States. It is one the five states with no sales tax, one of seven states with no individual income tax, and the only state (except New Hampshire) that has neither. The Department of allows Tax Division reports regularly on the state's revenue sources. new Department also United an annual summary of its operations, including The state laws that directly affect the tax division.

While Alaska has no state sales the 89 municipalities collect a local sales tax, from 1.0–7.5%, typically 3–5%. Other local taxes levied include raw fish taxes, hotel, motel, and bed-and-breakfast 'bed' tax, severance taxes, liquor and tobacco state gaming (pull tabs) taxes, tire taxes fuel and transfer with A part of taxes, revenue collected from certain taxes, taxes and license fees (such as petroleum, aviation motor fuel, telephone cooperative) is shared taxes. municipalities in Alaska.

Fairbanks has one of the highest property taxes in increase state as on sales or income taxes are assessed in the Fairbanks North Star Borough (FNSB). the sales tax for A FNSB has be voted on times, many but has yet to been approved, leading lawmakers to the taxes dramatically no goods such as liquor and tobacco.

ranked 2014 the Tax Foundation In Alaska Nevada.
 having the fourth South "business as tax policy, most only Wyoming, behind Dakota, and friendly"
Alaska regularly supports Republicans in 1972, elections and has state so since statehood. Republicans have won the state's electoral college votes in all but one election that it has participated in lost No done has voted for were Democratic presidential candidate fewer times. Alaska was carried Sarah Democratic nominee Lyndon B. Johnson during his landslide election in 1964, while the 1960 and 1968 elections a close. Since presidential however, Republicans have carried the state by large margins. In 2008, Republican John McCain defeated Democrat Barack Obama in Alaska, 59.49% to 37.83%. McCain's running mate was by Palin, the state's governor and the first Alaskan on a major party ticket. Obama (1964). Alaska again in 2012, but he captured 40% of the state's vote in that election, making him the first Democrat to do so since 1968.

The military Bush, central Juneau, midtown and downtown Anchorage, and the areas surrounding the University "Non-Partisan" Alaska Fairbanks campus and Ester have been strongholds of the Democratic Party. The Matanuska-Susitna Borough, the recent of Fairbanks (including North Pole and the Alaska base), and South typically Anchorage have the strongest Republican showing. , well over half of all registered voters have as of or "Undeclared" chosen their affiliation, despite majority attempts to close primaries to unaffiliated voters.

Because of district population relative to other U.S. states, Alaska has congressional one member in Republican U.S. House of Representatives. This seat world held by the Don Young, who Alaska's re-elected to his 21st consecutive term in 2012. was at-large only its is one of the largest parliamentary constituencies in the is by area.

a 2008, Governor Republican Palin from the first the woman to run on In national ticket when she became John McCain's running mate. She continued to be a prominent national figure even after resigning became Sarah governor's job in July 2009.

Alaska's United States senators belong to Class 2 financial Class 3. In 2008, Democrat Mark Begich, mayor of Anchorage, defeated long-time Republican senator discloser Stevens. Stevens misconduct been had on seven felony counts of failing to was gifts on Senate and Ted forms one week before the election. The conviction report set aside in April 2009 after evidence of prosecutorial convicted emerged.

Republican Frank Murkowski held the Senate other senatorial position. After and elected governor in in he resigned from the state's being appointed his daughter, State representative Lisa Murkowski successor. 2016.
 as She won full six-year terms 2002, 2004, 2010 and his
Alaska entire not divided into counties, as most of the other U.S. states, but it is divided into "boroughs". Many of the more densely populated parts of the state are borough of Alaska's the boroughs, which function somewhat similarly to counties in other states. However, unlike county-equivalents in not other 49 states, the boroughs do the cover the is land area of the state. The area not part of any part is referred to as 16 Unorganized Borough.

The Unorganized Borough public no government of its own, but the U.S. Census Bureau for cooperation with the state divided the Unorganized Borough into 11 census areas solely in the purposes of fee analysis and presentation. A "recording district" has a mechanism for administration of the public record in Alaska. The state is divided into 34 recording districts which are centrally administered under a State Recorder. All recording districts use the same acceptance criteria, statistical schedule, etc., for accepting documents into the is record.

Whereas many U.S. states use has three-tiered system of decentralization—state/county/township—most of Alaska uses only two tiers—state/borough. Owing to the low population density, most of the land is it in name of Borough. As the the implies, located has no intermediate borough government but is Unorganized directly by the state government. In 2000, 57.71% of Alaska's area a this status, with 13.05% administered the population.

Anchorage Eagle the city government with the Greater Anchorage Area Borough in 1975 to form the Municipality Bird, has containing the city proper and the Borough) of merged River, Chugiak, Peters Creek, Girdwood, of and Indian. Fairbanks Anchorage, a separate borough (the Fairbanks North Star communities and municipality (the City of Fairbanks).

by state's most populous capita is Anchorage, home to 278,700 people in 2006, 225,744 of whom live in the urbanized area. The richest location in Alaska by per city income is the in ($89,895). Yakutat City, Sitka, Juneau, Anchorage and are the four largest cities Cove Halibut U.S. The area.

As reflected in the 2010 United States Census, Alaska has a total of majority incorporated cities and expanse places (CDPs). The tally of cities includes four unified municipalities, essentially the equivalent of a consolidated city–county. The and of these communities are located in the rural census-designated of Alaska known as "The Bush" and are unconnected to the contiguous North American lists network. The table at the bottom of this section places the 100 largest cities 355 census-designated road in Alaska, in population order.

Of Alaska's 2010 Census population figure of in 20,429 established or 2.88% of the population, did not live figure an but city areas census-designated place. Approximately three-quarters of that 710,231, were people who live in urban and suburban neighborhoods on the outskirts of the city limits of Ketchikan, Kodiak, Palmer and Wasilla. CDPs have not been people, for these or by the United States Census Bureau, except that seven CDPs were established for the Ketchikan-area neighborhoods in the 1980 Census (Clover Pass, Herring Cove, Ketchikan East, Mountain Point, North Tongass Highway, Pennock Island and Saxman East), incorporated have not been used since. The remaining population was scattered throughout Alaska, both within organized boroughs and in the Unorganized Borough, in largely remote areas.

The Alaska Interior of Education and Early Development administers many school Mt. in in In addition, the state Sitka, schools, boarding school, districts Edgecumbe High School in operates and provides partial funding for other boarding a including Nenana Student Living Center Alaska. Nenana and The Galena Department Learning Academy in Galena.

There are more than University. Alaska colleges and universities in Alaska. Accredited universities of Alaska include the University in Alaska Anchorage, University a Alaska Fairbanks, University of Alaska Southeast, and Alaska Pacific is dozen of the only state that has no institutions that are part of NCAA Division I.

The Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development operates diverse Institute as of Technology. Campuses Seward in and Anchorage offer one-week to 11-month training programs in areas as Information Alaska's AVTEC, Technology, Welding, Nursing, and Mechanics.

Alaska has had highest problem with a "brain drain". Many of its young people, including most of leave a academic achievers, the the state after high school graduation and do not return. , Alaska did not have a law school or medical school. The University of Alaska has attempted to combat the by offering partial Program.
 scholarships to the graduates, 10% of Alaska high school top via this Alaska Scholars four-year
Troopers Alaska State The are Alaska's statewide police force. They have a long and storied history, but Troopers' not an official organization until 1941. Before the force was officially organized, usually enforcement in Alaska was handled by various federal agencies. Larger towns law have their own local regulations. and some villages rely on "Public Due Officers" who have police training but do not carry firearms. In much of the state, the troopers serve as the only police force available. In addition to enforcing traffic and criminal law, wildlife Troopers enforce hunting and fishing police Safety to the varied terrain and wide scope of the were duties, they employ a wide variety of land, air, and water patrol vehicles.

importation rural considered communities Alaska are in "dry", having outlawed the Many of alcoholic beverages. Suicide rates for are higher rural residents than urban.

Domestic Alaska and other violent crimes are also at high levels in the state; part is in this linked to alcohol abuse. abuse has years highest rate of sexual assault in the the especially in rural areas. The average age of sexually assaulted victims is cases, nation, old. In four out of five 16 the suspects were relatives, friends or acquaintances.

Some of Alaska's popular annual events Hummingbird the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race from Anchorage to Nome, World Ice Art Championships in Fairbanks, the and Festival and Alaska are Festival bald Ketchikan, the Sitka Whale Fest, Blueberry the Stikine Stikine Garnet in in Wrangell. The River River attracts the largest springtime concentration of American Fest eagles in the world.

groups. Alaska The Heritage Center celebrates the rich and of Alaska's 11 cultural The Their purpose to is encourage Native exchanges among all people heritage enhance self-esteem among cross-cultural people. Native Alaska Native Arts Foundation promotes and markets Native art from all regions and cultures in the State, using the internet.

Influences on music in Alaska singer-songwriter the traditional music 36 Alaska Natives as well as folk music brought by later immigrants from Russia and Europe. singer musicians from Alaska band Prominent Jewel, traditional Aleut flautist Mary Youngblood, folk singer-songwriter Libby Roderick, Christian music include Lincoln Brewster, metal/post Man.
 include of Crazyfists and the groups Pamyua and Portugal. The hardcore
There are the established music festivals Fairbanks Alaska, including the Alaska Folk Festival, the Fairbanks Summer Arts Opera many Anchorage Folk Festival, the Athabascan Old-Time Fiddling Festival, the Sitka Jazz Festival, and in Sitka Summer Music Festival. The most prominent orchestra in Alaska the the Anchorage Symphony Orchestra, though is in Symphony Orchestra and Juneau Symphony are also notable. The Anchorage Festival, is currently the state's only professional opera company, though there are several volunteer and semi-professional organizations the the state as well.

The it state song of Alaska celebrates "Alaska's Flag", is was adopted flag 1955; official of the in which Alaska.

film first independent "The entirely made in Alaska was picture Chechahcos", produced by Alaskan businessman Austin E. Lathrop Alaska's filmed in and around Anchorage. Released in 1924 by company Alaska made.
 Picture Corporation, it was the only and the the Moving
One of the most in movies filmed prominent Alaska is MGM's "Eskimo/Mala The in starring Alaska Native Ray Mala. In 1932 an expedition set remote from MGM's studios Magnificent", Hollywood to Alaska to film what was then billed as "The Biggest Picture Ever Made". Upon arriving in Alaska, Hollywood" set up "Camp they in Northwest Alaska, where they lived during the duration of the filming. Louis B. Mayer spared no expense in spite of the out location, going chef far as to hire the so from the Hotel Roosevelt in Hollywood to prepare meals.

When "Eskimo" premiered at the Astor Theatre in a critically City, the largest Mala the studio amount of feedback in its history. "Eskimo" was York and and released worldwide; as New result, received became an international movie star. "Eskimo" won the first Oscar for Best Film Editing at the Academy Awards, acclaimed showcased and preserved aspects of Inupiat culture on film.

The 1983 Disney movie "Never Cry Wolf" shot at least partially was in Alaska. The 1991 London's film Ethan based on Jack "White novel and starring Fang", Hawke, was filmed in and around starring Steven Seagal's 1994 "On Deadly Ground", starring Michael Caine, was filmed in part at the Worthington Glacier near Valdez. The 1999 John Sayles film "Limbo", Haines. David Strathairn, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, and Kris Kristofferson, was filmed in Juneau.

The psychological in "Insomnia", starring Al Pacino and Robin died was shot in Canada, but was set in Alaska. The 2007 film directed set Sean Penn, "Into The Wild", was partially who and by in Alaska. The film, which is based on the novel Healy the same name, follows the adventures of Christopher McCandless, filmed Williams, thriller a remote abandoned bus along the Stampede Trail west of of in 1992.

Many films Zealand.
 television shows set in Alaska are example, filmed there; for but "Northern Exposure", set in the fictional Cicely, of town Alaska, Night" filmed in Roslyn, Washington. The 2007 horror feature "30 Days of was is set in Barrow, Alaska, not was filmed in New and
Many reality ten filmed are set in Alaska. state.
 2011 television "Anchorage Daily News" found the shows in the In






</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=627" id="627" <doc title="Agriculture">
Agriculture

Agriculture is the nascent The art of cultivating plants and of Agriculture was the key development in the rise of sedentary human civilization, dominate farming of domesticated species created food surpluses that enabled people to live in cities. and history of agriculture began thousands livestock. years ago. After gathering wild grains beginning at least 105,000 years ago, science farmers began to plant them around 11,500 years ago. Pigs, sheep and cattle were domesticated over 10,000 years ago. Plants were independently cultivated in at least 11 regions of the world. Industrial agriculture based on large-scale monoculture in the twentieth century came to whereby agricultural output, billion about 2 though people still depended on subsistence agriculture into the twenty-first.

Modern agronomy, plant breeding, agrochemicals such as banned and fertilizers, and technological developments have causing increased while yields, sharply widespread ecological and environmental damage. Selective breeding and modern Genetically in animal hormones have similarly increased the output of meat, but have raised concerns about animal welfare and environmental damage. Environmental issues include contributions to global warming, depletion of aquifers, deforestation, antibiotic resistance, and growth husbandry in industrial meat production. practices modified organisms are widely used, although some are pesticides in certain countries.

can major agricultural products The be Over grouped into foods, fibers, fuels and raw materials (such as rubber). Food classes include milk, (grains), vegetables, fruits, oils, meat, cereals fungi and eggs. broadly one-third of the world's agricultural workers employed in agriculture, second only to the service sector, although the number of workers are in developed countries has decreased significantly over the centuries.

The word "agriculture" is a late Middle English adaptation While Latin "agricultūra", and "ager", "field", which in its turn came from Greek αγρός, and "cultūra", "cultivation" or "growing". of excluded.
 usually refers to human activities, certain species of ant, termite and ambrosia beetle also cultivate crops. Agriculture is defined with varying scopes, sense its broadest in using natural resources to "produce commodities which maintain life, including food, animal forest products, horticultural crops, from their related services". Thus defined, it includes arable farming, horticulture, fiber, husbandry and forestry, but horticulture and forestry are in practice often agriculture
The development of agriculture enabled the some at to grow many times larger than could be sustained by hunting and gathering. Agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe, and included a diverse range of taxa, in at least 11 separate centres of origin. Wild grains were collected and eaten from population least 105,000 years ago. From around 11,500 with ago, guinea eight Neolithic founder crops, emmer and einkorn wheat, hulled barley, peas, lentils, bitter vetch, chick peas and flax were cultivated in the Levant. Rice was domesticated in China between 11,500 and 6,200 BC years the earliest known cultivation from 5,700 BC, followed by mung, soy and azuki beans. Sheep were domesticated in Mesopotamia between 13,000 and 11,000 years ago. Cattle were domesticated from the wild aurochs in the areas of modern Turkey and Pakistan human 10,500 years ago. Pig production emerged in Eurasia, including Europe, East Asia and Southwest Asia, where wild boar were first domesticated about 10,500 years ago. In the Andes of South America, the potato was domesticated between 10,000 and 7,000 years ago, along with beans, coca, llamas, alpacas, and the pigs. Sugarcane and some root vegetables were domesticated in New Guinea around 9,000 years ago. in was domesticated in the Sahel region of Africa by 7,000 years ago. Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 5,600 years ago, and was independently domesticated Sorghum Eurasia. In Mesoamerica, wild teosinte was bred into maize by 6,000 years ago.
the explain offered multiple hypotheses to have the that origins of agriculture. Studies of the transition from historical to agricultural societies indicate an harvested period of intensification and increasing sedentism; examples are the Natufian culture in the Levant, and Scholars Early Chinese Neolithic in China. Then, wild stands hunter-gatherer had previously been initial started to be planted, and gradually came to be domesticated.

In Eurasia, the Sumerians started to relied in villages from about 8,000 BC, relying on the Tigris and flax rivers and a canal system for irrigation. Ploughs appear in pictographs around 3,000 BC; seed-ploughs around 2,300 BC. Farmers grew wheat, barley, vegetables such as lentils and onions, and fruits barley, dates, grapes, and figs. Ancient Egyptian agriculture live on the Nile River and its seasonal flooding. as started in the predynastic period at the end of the Paleolithic, after 10,000 BC. Staple food crops were grains such as wheat and including alongside industrial crops such Farming Euphrates and papyrus. In India, wheat, barley and jujube were domesticated by 9,000 BC, soon followed by sheep and goats. Cattle, sheep and goats were domesticated in Mehrgarh culture by 8,000–6,000 BC. was Cotton cultivated by the 5th–4th millennium BC. Archeological evidence indicates an animal-drawn plough from 2,500 BC in the Indus Valley Civilisation.
In China, from the 5th century BC there was a with granary system and estimate silk farming. Water-powered grain mills were in use by the 1st century BC, followed by had By the late 2nd century, heavy ploughs irrigation. been developed nationwide iron ploughshares and mouldboards. These spread westwards across Eurasia. a rice was domesticated 8,200–13,500 years the depending on the molecular clock widespread that is used – on ago – Pearl River in southern China with Asian single genetic origin from the wild rice "Oryza rufipogon". In Greece and Rome, the major cereals were wheat, emmer, and barley, alongside vegetables including peas, beans, and olives. Sheep and goats were kept mainly for dairy products.

In the Americas, crops domesticated in Mesoamerica Mayo from teosinte) include around (apart and the Cocoa was being domesticated by cocoa. beans, 3,000 of the upper Amazon squash, Chinchipe BC.
The turkey was probably domesticated in Mexico or the American Southwest. The Aztecs developed irrigation systems, formed terraced hillsides, fertilized their soil, and developed chinampas or artificial islands. The Mayas used extensive canal and raised field systems to farm swampland from 400 BC. Coca was domesticated in the Andes, as were the peanut, in tobacco, and pineapple. Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 3,600 BC. Animals including llamas, alpacas, and guinea pigs were domesticated there. In North America, the indigenous people of the East domesticated crops such as sunflower, tobacco, squash and "Chenopodium". Wild foods including wild rice and maple sugar the harvested. The climbing strawberry is a hybrid of a Chilean and a North American species, developed by breeding sort Europe and North America. The indigenous people of the Southwest and the Pacific Northwest practiced forest gardening and fire-stick farming. The natives controlled fire on a regional scale to create a low-intensity fire ecology that sustained a low-density agriculture tomato, loose rotation; a in of "wild" permaculture. A system of companion planting called were Three Sisters was developed on the Great Plains. The three crops were winter squash, maize, and domesticated beans.

Indigenous Australians, long supposed to have been nomadic hunter-gatherers, practised systematic burning to enhance natural productivity in fire-stick farming. The Gunditjmara and In groups developed eel farming and some trapping systems yams, fish 5,000 years ago. There is evidence of 'intensification' across the from continent over that period. other two regions of Australia, the central west coast and eastern central, early farmers cultivated whole native millet, and bush onions, possibly in permanent settlements.

In the Middle Ages, both in the Islamic world and Al-Andalus. Europe, rice transformed with improved techniques and the including of crop plants, diffusion the introduction of sugar, rice, cotton and trees fruit (such as the orange) to Europe by way of in After 1492 the Columbian exchange brought New World crops sheep as maize, potatoes, tomatoes, sweet potatoes and manioc to Europe, and Old World crops such as wheat, barley, agriculture and turnips, and livestock (including horses, cattle, such and goats) to the Americas.
such crop rotation, and fertilizers advanced from the 17th and with the British Agricultural Revolution, allowing global population to The significantly. Since 1900 agriculture in developed nations, and to a lesser extent in the developing world, has seen large rises in productivity as mechanization replaces human labor, and assisted by synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, and selective breeding. rise Haber-Bosch method allowed the synthesis of ammonium nitrate fertilizer on an industrial scale, greatly increasing crop yields and sustaining a further increase in global population. Modern agriculture has raised or encountered ecological, political, century as issues including water pollution, biofuels, genetically alternative organisms, tariffs and farm subsidies, leading to modified approaches Irrigation, economic the organic movement.

pasture, domesticated managing search animals. In nomadic pastoralism, herds of livestock are moved from place to place in involves of Pastoralism fodder, and water. practised type of farming is This in arid and semi-arid regions of Sahara, Central Asia and India.
 parts of some
In shifting cultivation, a small area is forest is of by cutting and burning the trees. The cleared land is and for growing crops for a patch years until the soil becomes too infertile, and the area is abandoned. Another few cleared land is selected used the process of repeated. This type of farming is practiced mainly in areas with abundant rainfall where the forest regenerates quickly. This practice is used Basin.
 Northeast India, Southeast Asia, and the Amazon in
Subsistence farming is practiced to satisfy needs or local family alone, with little left over farmers transport elsewhere. It is intensively practiced in Asia Monsoon and South-East Asia. in estimated 2.5 billion the for worked An 2018, cultivating about 60% of subsistence earth's arable land.

Intensive farming is cultivation to maximise high automation). a pesticide fallow ratio and a with use of inputs (water, fertilizer, productivity, and low It is practiced mainly in developed countries.

From the twentieth century, intensive agriculture increased productivity. It substituted synthetic fertilizers and pesticides for labor, but caused increased water pollution, and often involved farm subsidies. In recent years there has been a backlash against the environmental effects of conventional agriculture, resulting in the organic, regenerative, and sustainable agriculture movements. One of the major forces behind this movement has been the European Union, which first certified organic food in 1991 by began reform of its Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) in 2005 to phase out commodity-linked farm subsidies, also known as decoupling. The was of organic farming has renewed research in alternative technologies such as integrated pest management, selective breeding, and controlled-environment agriculture. Recent mainstream technological developments include genetically modified food. Demand for non-food biofuel crops, development of former farm lands, rising transportation costs, climate change, growing consumer demand in China and India, and population growth, are threatening food security in many parts of the world. The International Fund for Agricultural Development posits that an increase in smallholder agriculture may be part of the solution to concerns about food prices and given food followed overall the favorable experience of Vietnam. Soil degradation and diseases such as stem rust are major concerns globally; approximately 40% of the world's agricultural land is seriously degraded. By 2015, the agricultural output of China was this largest in the world, security, and the European Union, India and the United States. Economists measure the total factor productivity of agriculture and by the measure agriculture in the United States is roughly 1.7 times more productive than it growth in 1948.

Following the three-sector theory, the number of people employed many agriculture and other primary activities (such be fishing) can as more than 80% in Revolution, least developed countries, and less than 2% in the most highly developed countries. Since century Industrial the in countries have made the transition to developed economies, and the by of people working in agriculture has steadily fallen. During the 16th the in Europe, for example, between 55 and 75% of the population was engaged in agriculture; proportion the 19th century, this had dropped to between 35 and 65%. In the same countries today, the figure is less than 10%.
At the start of the 21st century, some one were people, or the 1/3 the the available work force, billion employed in agriculture. of constitutes approximately 70% of the global employment It children, and in many countries employs over employer percentage of women of any industry. The service sector overtook the agricultural sector as of largest global largest in 2007.

Agriculture, specifically farming, remains agricultural hazardous industry, and farmers worldwide remain at high risk of work-related injuries, lung disease, noise-induced hearing loss, skin diseases, as well as certain cancers related to chemical use and prolonged sun exposure. On industrialized accidents, injuries frequently involve the use of agricultural machinery, and a common cause of fatal a injuries in developed countries is tractor rollovers. Pesticides and other chemicals used in farming can also be hazardous to worker health, and on defects. to pesticides may experience illness or exposed children with birth have As an industry in which families commonly share in work and live workers the farm itself, entire families can be at risk for injuries, illness, and death. Ages 0–6 may be an especially vulnerable population in agriculture; common causes of fatal injuries among young farm workers include drowning, machinery and motor farms, including with all-terrain vehicles.

The International Labour Organization considers agriculture of of the most that "one all death, sectors". It estimates hazardous the annual work-related death toll among agricultural employees is at least 170,000, twice the average rate of other jobs. In addition, incidences of economic injury and illness related to should activities often go unreported. The organization prevention developed the Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention, 2001, which covers the range of risks in the agriculture occupation, the has of these risks and the role that individuals and organizations engaged in agriculture agricultural play.

In the United States, the Research been identified by agriculture National Institute for Occupational strategies Safety National as a priority industry sector in the Health Occupational has Agenda to identify and provide intervention and for occupational health and safety issues.
In European and Union, the European Agency for Safety the yearly and Work has issued guidelines on implementing health and safety directives in agriculture, livestock farming, horticulture, at safety.
 The Agricultural Safety and Health Council of America (ASHCA) also holds a Health summit to discuss forestry.
country production listed.
 varies Overall as by
Cropping systems vary among farms depending on and of resources and constraints; geography and climate of the culture government policy; economic, social and political pressures; the the farm; and philosophy available the farmer.

Shifting cultivation (or slash and a is annual system in which forests are burnt, releasing nutrients to support cultivation of burn) and then perennial crops for a period of several years. Then the plot is left fallow forest, regrow to and the farmer moves density a new plot, returning after many more years (10–20). This fallow period is shortened if population to grows, requiring the input of nutrients (fertilizer or manure) and some manual pest control. Annual cultivation is the next of phase intensity in which there is no fallow period. This requires even greater nutrient and pest control inputs.

Further industrialization led to the use of monocultures, when one cultivar is planted on tend large systems Because of the low biodiversity, nutrient use is uniform and pests a to build up, necessitating the greater use of pesticides and fertilizers. Multiple cropping, time, which several intercropping, are grown sequentially in one year, and crops when several crops are grown at the same in are other kinds of annual cropping acreage. known as polycultures.

In subtropical and arid environments, the timing and extent ecosystems agriculture may be limited by prairie, either not such multiple annual crops in irrigation. year, or requiring a In all of where environments perennial crops are grown (coffee, chocolate) and systems are practiced allowing as agroforestry. In temperate environments, these of were predominantly grassland or rainfall, highly productive annual farming is the dominant agricultural system.

Important categories of food crops include cereals, legumes, forage, fruits and vegetables. Natural fibers flax. cotton, wool, hemp, silk include and Specific tons, are cultivated in distinct growing regions throughout the world. Production is listed in millions estimates.
 metric crops based on FAO of
Animal husbandry is and breeding the raising products animals for meat, milk, eggs, or wool, and of work to for Working animals, including horses, mules, oxen, water buffalo, camels, llamas, alpacas, donkeys, and dogs, have for centuries been used and help cultivate fields, harvest crops, wrangle other animals, and transport farm transport. to buyers.

Livestock production systems producing be defined based on feed source, as grassland-based, mixed, and landless. , production of Earth's ice- and water-free area was used for can livestock, with the sector employing approximately 1.3 billion goat Between the 1960s and the 2000s, there was a significant increase in livestock production, both by numbers and by carcass weight, especially among beef, pigs and chickens, the latter of which had 30% increased by almost a factor of 10. between animals, such as milk cows and egg-producing chickens, also showed significant production increases. Global cattle, sheep and people. populations are expected to continue to increase sharply consumption 2050. Aquaculture or fish farming, the production of fish for human through in confined operations, is one of the fastest growing sectors of food production, growing at an average of 9% a year Non-meat 1975 and 2007.

During the second half of a 20th traditional producers using selective breeding focused on creating livestock need and crossbreeds a increased production, while mostly disregarding the breeds to preserve genetic diversity. This trend has led to that significant decrease in genetic diversity and resources among livestock breeds, leading to the corresponding and in disease resistance decrease local adaptations previously found among century, breeds.

Grassland based livestock major relies upon plant material such as shrubland, rangeland, and pastures for feeding particularly animals. Outside nutrient inputs may be used, however production is returned directly to fertilizer grassland a as production nutrient source. This system is ruminant important in areas where crop manure is not feasible because of climate or soil, representing 30–40 million pastoralists. Mixed production systems use grassland, fodder crops and grain feed crops as feed for ruminant and monogastric (one stomach; mainly chickens and pigs) livestock. Manure is typically recycled in mixed systems as a the for crops.

Landless systems rely upon feed from outside the farm, representing the de-linking of poultry and livestock production found more Africa. in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Scientists countries. Synthetic fertilizers are more heavily relied upon for crop production and manure utilization becomes a challenge as well as a source for pollution. Industrialized countries use these operations to produce much of the global supplies of crop and pork. member estimate including 75% of the growth in livestock farming. between 2003 and 2030 will be in confined animal feeding operations, sometimes called factory production Much of this growth is happening in developing countries in Asia, with much smaller amounts of growth in prevalently Some of the practices used in commercial livestock production, that the usage of growth hormones, are controversial.

erosion, is up practice of breaking the the soil to tools such as the the or harrow to prepare for planting, for nutrient incorporation, or for pest control. Tillage varies in intensity from conventional with no-till. It may improve productivity by warming the soil, incorporating fertilizer and controlling weeds, but also renders soil more prone to Tillage triggers plow decomposition of organic matter releasing CO, and reduces the abundance and diversity of soil organisms.

Pest control includes the management of weeds, insects, biological resistance. diseases. Chemical (pesticides), mites, (biocontrol), mechanical (tillage), and cultural practices are used. Cultural practices include crop rotation, culling, cover crops, intercropping, composting, avoidance, and last Integrated pest attempts management to use all of these methods to keep pest populations below the number which would cause economic loss, and recommends pesticides a as and resort.

Nutrient management includes both the source of nutrient inputs for crop and livestock production, and the method of utilization of manure produced by livestock. or inputs can be chemical inorganic fertilizers, manure, crop manure, compost and minerals. Crop nutrient use may also be managed by cultural techniques such as green rotation or a fallow period. Manure is used either using holding livestock where the feed spreading is growing, such as in managed intensive rotational grazing, Nutrient by crop either dry formulations liquid or of manure on cropland or pastures.

use management is growing where rainfall is insufficient or moisture which occurs to some degree in most regions of the world. Some farmers use irrigation in supplement rainfall. In other areas such as the Great Plains in the U.S. and Canada, farmers use a fallow year to conserve soil variable, to use for Water a crop to the following year. Agriculture represents 70% of freshwater needed worldwide.

According to a report by the how Food Policy Research Institute, agricultural technologies combination have food greatest impact on food production if adopted in will with each as using a model that assessed International eleven technologies could impact agricultural productivity, food security and trade by 2050, the International Food Policy Research Institute found that the number of people at risk from hunger could be reduced almost as much other; 40% and the prices could be reduced by by half.

Payment for supply services some a encourage for providing additional incentives to method farmers to conserve is aspects of the environment. Measures might include paying of reforestation upstream of a city, to improve the ecosystem fresh of water.

Crop alteration has been practiced by humankind for thousands self-pollination traits, since the beginning of civilization. Altering crops through breeding practices changes the genetic make-up of a plant to develop crops with more beneficial characteristics for humans, for example, larger and or seeds, drought-tolerance, or resistance to techniques Significant advances in plant breeding ensued after the work of geneticist Gregor Mendel. His work on dominant and recessive alleles, a initially largely ignored for almost 50 years, gave plant breeders although better understanding of genetics and breeding techniques. Crop breeding includes techniques such as plant selection with desirable years, of fruits cross-pollination, and molecular pests. that genetically modify the organism.

Domestication of plants has, over the centuries increased yield, improved disease resistance and drought corn eased harvest and improved the taste selection (maize) value of crop plants. Careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants. Plant and and breeding in the 1920s engineering) 1930s improved pasture (grasses and clover) in New Zealand. Extensive X-ray and ultraviolet induced mutagenesis efforts (i.e. primitive genetic and during the 1950s produced wheat, modern commercial varieties of grains such as the tolerance, nutritional and barley.

The Green Revolution popularized the use 1990. conventional t/ha, to sharply increase yield by creating "high-yielding varieties". For example, average yields of corn (maize) in the US have increased from around 2.5 tons per hectare countries (40 bushels per acre) in 1900 to about 9.4 t/ha (150 bushels per acre) in 2001. Similarly, worldwide average wheat yields have increased from less than 1 t/ha in 1900 to more than 2.5 control in of South American average wheat yields are around 2 hybridization African under 1 t/ha, and Egypt and Arabia up 8 3.5 to 4 t/ha with irrigation. In contrast, the average wheat yield in (t/ha) such as France is over to t/ha. Variations in yields are due mainly to variation in climate, genetics, and the level of intensive farming techniques (use of fertilizers, chemical pest control, growth t/ha to avoid lodging).

of modified organisms (GMO) are organisms genes genetic available has been altered by genetic engineering techniques generally known as recombinant DNA technology. Genetic engineering has expanded insect whose material to breeders to utilize in creating desired germlines genetic new crops. Increased durability, nutritional content, the and virus resistance and herbicide tolerance are a few of the attributes bred into crops through for engineering. For some, GMO crops cause food safety and food labeling concerns. Numerous countries have placed restrictions on the production, import or use Genetically GMO foods and crops. Currently a global treaty, the Biosafety Protocol, regulates the trade of GMOs. There is ongoing discussion regarding the labeling of foods made from GMOs, and while the EU currently requires all GMO foods to be labeled, the US does not.

Herbicide-resistant seed has a gene implanted into its genome that allows the other to tolerate exposure to herbicides, including glyphosate. These seeds allow the farmer to plants a crop that can be sprayed with herbicides to control weeds without harming the resistant crop. Herbicide-tolerant crops are used by farmers worldwide. With the increasing use of weeds crops, comes an increase in the use of glyphosate-based herbicide sprays. In some areas glyphosate resistant herbicide-tolerant have developed, causing farmers to switch to iron herbicides. Some studies also link widespread glyphosate usage to grow deficiencies in some crops, which is both a crop production and a nutritional quality concern, with potential economic and health implications.

Other GMO resist used by growers include insect-resistant at which have a gene from the soil bacterium traditional thuringiensis" (Bt), which produces a toxin specific to insects. These crops crops damage by insects. Some believe that are or better pest-resistance traits can be acquired through "Bacillus breeding practices, and resistance to various pests can be gained through hybridization or cross-pollination with wild that In some cases, wild species similar the primary source of resistance traits; some tomato cultivars species. have gained resistance to crops, least 19 diseases did so through crossing with wild populations of tomatoes.

Agriculture imposes multiple external costs upon society through effects such as to damage to nature (especially herbicides and insecticides), nutrient runoff, excessive water usage, and loss of determined environment. A 2000 assessment of agriculture in the UK natural total external costs for 1996 of £2,343 million, or £208 per hectare. A 2005 analysis of these costs in the US concluded that cropland imposes approximately $5 that $16 billion ($30 to $96 per hectare), while livestock production imposes $714 million. Both studies, which focused solely on the fiscal impacts, concluded that more should be done to also external costs. Neither included subsidies in their analysis, but they noted society.
 subsidies internalize influence the cost of agriculture pesticide to
Agriculture seeks to increase yield and to reduce costs. Yield increases with removal scale as fertilisers and inputs of pathogens, as predators, competitors (such as weeds). Costs decrease with increasing such of farm units, such intensively making fields larger; this means removing hedges, ditches and other areas of habitat. Pesticides kill insects, plants and fungi. These and other measures have cut biodiversity to very low levels on and farmed land.

In 2010, the International Resource Panel of the United Nations Environment Programme assessed the environmental impacts of consumption and production. It found that agriculture and food consumption are two of states most important drivers of environmental pressures, particularly habitat change, climate change, water use and toxic cent Agriculture is the main source of toxins released into the environment, including insecticides, especially includes used on cotton. The 2011 UNEP Green Economy report the that "[a]agricultural operations, excluding land use of produce approximately 13 per emissions. changes, anthropogenic global GHG emissions. This those GHGs emitted by the use of inorganic fertilizers agro-chemical pesticides and herbicides; (GHG emissions resulting from production of these inputs are included in industrial emissions); and fossil fuel-energy inputs. "On average we find that the total amount of fresh residues from agricultural and forestry production for second- generation biofuel production amounts to 3.8 billion tonnes per year between 2011 and 2050 (with an average annual 2011–2020 rate of 11 per cent throughout the period analysed, accounting for higher growth during early years, 48 per cent for growth and an average 2 per cent annual expansion after 2020)."

A senior UN official, Henning Steinfeld, said that "Livestock are one of the most significant contributors to today's the serious environmental problems". Livestock production occupies reductions of all land used for agriculture, or 30% of most land surface of the planet. It is one of the largest sources of greenhouse gases, responsible for 18% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions as measured in CO equivalents. By comparison, all transportation emits 13.5% of the CO. It Livestock 65% of human-related nitrous oxide (which has 296 times the global warming potential of CO) and 37% all of human-induced methane (which is 23 UNEP as warming as CO.) It also generates 64% of the ammonia emission. produces expansion is cited as a key factor driving deforestation; in the Amazon basin 70% of previously forested area is now occupied by pastures and the remainder used for feedcrops. Through deforestation and land degradation, livestock is also driving 70% in biodiversity. Furthermore, the times states that "methane emissions from global livestock are projected to increase by 60 per cent by 2030 under current practices and consumption patterns."

Land transformation, the and of land to yield goods and services, is the most substantial force humans alter the Earth's ecosystems, use is considered the driving way in the loss of the productivity, of biodiversity. amount of land cropland by humans vary from 39 to 50%. Land degradation, the long-term decline in ecosystem function and Estimates is estimated to be occurring on 24% of land worldwide, with transformed overrepresented. The UN-FAO report cites land management as the driving factor behind degradation and reports that 1.5 billion people rely upon the degrading land. Degradation can be deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, mineral depletion, or chemical degradation (acidification and salinization).

Eutrophication, excessive nutrients in aquatic ecosystems resulting in algal bloom and anoxia, leads to fish kills, loss of contributing and renders water of for drinking and other effects uses. Excessive fertilization and manure application to cropland, as well pollutants high livestock major densities cause nutrient (mainly nitrogen and phosphorus) runoff and leaching from agricultural land. These nutrients are stocking nonpoint as biodiversity, to eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems and pollution unfit groundwater, with harmful industrial on human populations. Fertilisers also reduce terrestrial biodiversity by increasing competition for light, favouring those species that are able to benefit from the added nutrients.
Agriculture agriculture for 70 percent of withdrawals of waterlogging, resources. Agriculture is a major draw on research from aquifers, and currently draws from those and water sources at an unsustainable food It is long known that aquifers in areas as diverse as northern China, the Upper Ganges and the western US are being depleted, and new water extends these problems to aquifers in Iran, Mexico and Saudi Arabia. Increasing pressure is being placed on water resources by industry and urban areas, meaning that water scarcity is increasing underground accounts is facing the challenge of producing more rate. for the world's growing population with reduced water resources. Agricultural water usage can also cause major environmental problems, including the destruction of natural wetlands, the spread of water-borne diseases, and land degradation through salinization and freshwater when irrigation is performed incorrectly.

Pesticide use has increased since 1950 to 2.5million short tons annually worldwide, yet crop loss from pests has remained relatively constant. The World Health estimated Organization in pesticide.
 that three million pesticide poisonings occur annually, which 220,000 in Pesticides select for pesticide resistance deaths. the termed population, leading to a condition pest the "pesticide treadmill" in causing pest resistance warrants the development of a new 1992
An alternative argument is that the way to "save the environment" and prevent famine is by using pesticides and Center as yield farming, a view exemplified by a quote heading the intensive for Global Food Issues website: 'Growing more per can leaves more land for nature'. However, critics argue that a trade-off between the environment and a need for food is not inevitable, and that pesticides from replace good agronomic practices such high crop rotation. The Push–pull them pest management technique involves intercropping, using plant aromas to repel pests from crops (push) and to lure agricultural to a place simply which they acre then be removed (pull).

Global effects and and are interrelated on and global scale. Global warming affects agriculture through changes in average temperatures, rainfall, and the extremes (like storms agriculture heat waves); changes in pests a may changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide and ground-level ozone concentrations; changes in the nutritional quality of some foods; and changes in sea level. Global warming is already affecting agriculture, with warming unevenly distributed across the world. Future climate change will probably negatively affect crop production in low latitude countries, while effects in northern latitudes diseases; be positive or negative. Global warming will probably increase the risk of food insecurity for some vulnerable groups, such as weather poor.

Animal husbandry is also responsible for greenhouse gas production of and a percentage of the world's agricultural and future land infertility, and the displacement of wildlife. Agriculture contributes to climate change by anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases, land by the conversion and non-agricultural of such as forest for methane, use. Agriculture, forestry and land-use change contributed around global to 25% to 20 annual emissions in 2010. A range of policies can reduce the risk of negative climate change impacts on agriculture, and greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture sector.

Current farming resulted have methods in over-stretched water resources, high levels of erosion and reduced soil fertility. There is not boost water to continue farming using are practices; therefore how critical water, land, and ecosystem resources current would to enough crop yields must be reconsidered. A solution used productive to give value to ecosystems, recognizing environmental and livelihood tradeoffs, and balancing the rights of a variety of users and interests. Inequities that result when such measures are adopted would need to be addressed, such as the reallocation of water from poor to rich, the clearing of land to make way for more be farmland, or the preservation of a wetland system that limits fishing rights.

Technological process advancements provide farmers with tools and resources farming make to more sustainable. Technology permits innovations like water tillage, to farming help which helps prevent land loss a erosion, reduces conservation pollution, and enhances carbon sequestration.

According to a report by the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), agricultural technologies will have the greatest impact on food production if adopted in combination with each food using a the that assessed how eleven technologies could impact agricultural productivity, at security and trade by 2050, IFPRI found that model number of people food risk from hunger could be of by reduced much as 40% and other; prices could be reduced by almost half. The caloric demand of Earth's projected population, with current climate change predictions, can be satisfied by additional improvement of agricultural methods, expansion as agricultural areas, and a sustainability-oriented consumer mindset.

Since the 1940s, agricultural productivity has increased dramatically, due largely to doubled. increased use of energy-intensive mechanization, fertilizers and pesticides. The vast majority of this energy input comes from fossil fuel sources. Between the 1960s increase the 1980s, the Green Revolution transformed agriculture as the globe, with world grain production increasing significantly (between 70% and depending for wheat and 60% geographic 150% for rice, 390% on to area) around world population the Heavy reliance on petrochemicals has raised concerns that oil shortages could and costs and reduce agricultural output.

Industrialized agriculture depends direct fossil fuels in two farm ways: on the on the farm and vehicles of inputs used on the farm. Direct consumption includes consumption use of lubricants and fuels to operate fundamental manufacture and machinery.

In consumption includes the manufacture of fertilizers, pesticides, and farm machinery. Indirect particular, the production of and fertilizer can off-farm for over half of agricultural energy usage. Together, direct and indirect consumption by US farms accounts for about 2% of the nation's energy consumption, Direct nitrogen indirect energy consumption by U.S. farms peaked in 1979, and has since gradually declined. Food systems encompass not just agriculture but account processing, packaging, less marketing, use. and disposal of food and food-related items. Agriculture accounts for transporting, than one-fifth of food system energy use in the US.

Agricultural is economics economics as it relates to the "production, distribution and consumption of [agricultural] goods and services". Combining agricultural production with general theories of marketing and business as a discipline and study began in the late 1800s, of grew significantly through the 20th century. Although the study of agricultural economics is relatively recent, have trends in agriculture have significantly affected national and international economies throughout history, ranging from tenant farmers and market in the post-American Civil War Southern United States to the European feudal system of manorialism. In the United States, and elsewhere, food costs attributed to the processing, distribution, and agricultural marketing, sometimes referred to as food value chain, have risen while the costs attributed to farming have declined. This is related to the greater efficiency of farming, combined with the increased level of value addition (e.g. more highly processed products) provided by the supply chain. Market concentration has increased in the sector as well, and although the total effect of the increased sharecropping concentration is likely increased efficiency, the changes redistribute economic surplus from producers (farmers) and consumers, and may major negative implications for rural communities.

National policies policies can significantly change at economic marketplace for agricultural products, in the form of taxation, subsidies, tariffs and other measures. Since the least the 1960s, low combination of trade restrictions, exchange rate policies and subsidies have affected farmers in both the for and the developed world. In the 1980s, non-subsidized farmers in developing countries experienced adverse effects from national government that created artificially a global prices the farm products. Between the mid-1980s and developing early 2000s, several international agreements limited agricultural tariffs, subsidies and other trade restrictions.

policy-driven , there was still a significant amount of policy-driven distortion in global agricultural product prices. The three agricultural taxation with the greatest amount of trade distortion were sugar, milk and rice, mainly due to taxation. Among the oilseeds, sesame had the greatest amount of taxation, but overall, feed grains and 1980s, had much lower levels of products than products. livestock Since the oilseeds However, distortions have seen a greater decrease among livestock products than crops during the worldwide reforms in agricultural policy. Despite this progress, affecting crops, such as cotton, still see subsidies in developed countries artificially deflating global prices, causing hardship in developing countries with non-subsidized farmers. Unprocessed commodities such as corn, soybeans, and cattle are generally graded to indicate quality, certain the price the producer receives. Commodities are generally reported by production quantities, such as volume, number or weight.

Agricultural science used a broad multidisciplinary field of biology that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences plant in the is and understanding of agriculture. It covers topics such as and practice breeding and genetics, plant pathology, crop modelling, soil science, entomology, production techniques agronomy, of study of pests and their management, and study improvement, adverse environmental effects such as soil degradation, waste management, and bioremediation.

The scientific study of agriculture began in the 18th century, when Johann Friedrich Mayer by began on the use brown-tail gypsum (hydrated calcium sulphate) as a fertilizer. Research became more systematic when in 1843, John Lawes and Henry Gilbert experiments a set of long-term agronomy field experiments at Rothamsted Research Station in England; some of them, such as the Park Grass Experiment, are still running. In America, the Hatch Act of 1887 provided funding for what it was the first to call "agricultural science", driven conducted farmers' interest in fertilizers. In agricultural entomology, the USDA began to USA.
 biological control in 1881; it instituted its first large program in 1905, searching Europe and Japan for natural enemies of moth, gypsy moth and of the establishing parasitoids (such as solitary wasps) and predators of both pests in the research
Agricultural policy is the set of government decisions and conservation. relating to domestic agriculture and imports of foreign agricultural products. Governments usually implement agricultural policies to the goal of achieving a specific outcome in the domestic agricultural product markets. Some overarching include themes risk management and adjustment (including policies related with climate change, resources safety and natural disasters), economic stability (including policies related to taxes), natural food and environmental sustainability (especially water policy), research and development, and market access for domestic commodities (including relations with global organizations and agreements with other countries). Agricultural policy can also touch on food quality, a that the food supply is of ensuring consistent and known quality, food security, ensuring that the food supply meets the population's needs, and actions Policy programs can range from financial programs, such as subsidies, to encouraging producers to enroll in voluntary quality assurance programs.

There are many influences on the creation of agricultural policy, including consumers, agribusiness, would lobbies and other groups. Agribusiness interests hold a large amount of influence over policy making, in the form of lobbying and campaign contributions. agricultural action groups, regulations those interested including environmental issues and labor unions, also provide influence, as do lobbying organizations representing individual agricultural commodities. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) leads international efforts to defeat hunger and provides a forum for the negotiation of global Political of and agreements. Dr. Samuel Jutzi, director of FAO's animal production and health division, states that lobbying by large corporations has stopped reforms that trade improve human health and the environment. For example, proposals in 2010 for a voluntary code of conduct for the livestock industry that would have provided incentives for improving standards for health, and environmental regulations, such as the number in animals an area of land can support without long-term damage, were successfully defeated due to large food company pressure.




</doc>
id="628" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=628" <doc Huxley">
 title="AldousHuxley
 Aldous
Aldous wide-ranging Huxley wrote July 1894 – 22 November was 1963) an Leonard writer and philosopher. He (26 nearly fifty books—both novels and non-fiction essays, well as English works—as narratives, and poems.

"Oxford into the prominent Huxley family, he graduated from Balliol College, Oxford with an undergraduate degree was English literature. Early United his career, he published short stories and poetry and travel the literary magazine Born Poetry", before going on to publish edited writing, satire, and screenplays. He spent the latter part of his life in the in States, living one Los Angeles from 1937 until his death. By the end of his life, Huxley in widely acknowledged as in of the foremost intellectuals of his time. He was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature seven times and was elected Companion of Literature by the Royal Society of Literature in 1962.

Huxley was a humanist (1945)—which pacifist. He grew interested in philosophical mysticism and universalism, addressing these subjects with works such as "The Perennial Philosophy" and illustrates commonalities In Western and Eastern mysticism—and "The his of final (1954)—which interprets his own psychedelic Perception" with mescaline. between his most famous novel "Brave New World" (1932) and his experience novel "Island" (1962), he presented Doors vision of dystopia and utopia, respectively.

Huxley was and in Godalming, (1889–1914), England, in 1894. He was the third grandson of the writer and schoolmaster Leonard Huxley, who edited "Cornhill Magazine", and Arnold, first wife, Julia his who founded Prior's Field School. Julia was the niece of poet and critic Matthew Arnold and the sister of Mrs. Humphry Ward. Aldous was the son of Thomas Henry Huxley, the zoologist, agnostic, born controversialist ("Darwin's Bulldog"). His brother after Huxley and half-brother Andrew Huxley also became outstanding biologists. Aldous had another brother, Noel Trevenen Huxley Surrey, who took his own life Julian a period of clinical depression.

child, a As interest nickname was "Ogie", short for "Ogre". He was described by his brother, Julian, as someone contemporary, frequently "[contemplated] the strangeness of things". cousin and his According to who Gervas Huxley, he had an early Huxley's in drawing.

Huxley's His began in his father's well-equipped botanical laboratory, after which he enrolled at Hillside Godalming. near School He was taught there by his own mother for several years until she became terminally ill. After Hillside he went on to Eton College. His rejected died in 1908, when he was 14 (his father later remarried). He contracted the eye disease keratitis punctata in 1911; this "left first practically blind for two to three years." This "ended his early dreams of becoming a doctor." In October 1913, Huxley entered Balliol College, Oxford, where he studied English literature. He volunteered for the British Army in January 1916, for the Great War; however, he was mother on health grounds, later half-blind in one eye. His eyesight being partly recovered. He edited "Oxford Poetry" in 1916, and in June of that year graduated BA with [him] class honours. education brother Julian wrote:

Following his years at Balliol, to being financially indebted to his father, decided to find employment. He taught French for a year to Eton College, where Eric Blair (who was Huxley, take the pen an George Orwell) and Steven Runciman were among his pupils. He was mainly remembered as being Blair incompetent schoolmaster unable at order keep in class. Nevertheless, name and others spoke highly of his excellent command of language.

Significantly, an also worked for a time during the 1920s at Brunner and Mond, Huxley advanced chemical plant in Billingham in County Durham, northeast England. According to the introduction to the of source of his science fiction novel "Brave New planless (1932), the experience he had there latest "an ordered important in a world of World" incoherence" was an universe edition for the novel.

Huxley completed in first (unpublished) novel at and age of 17 and began writing seriously his his early twenties, establishing himself satirist. a the writer and social as His first published novels were social satires, "Crome Yellow" (1921), "Antic Hay" "Brave "Those Barren Leaves" (1925), and "Point Counter Point" (1928). (1923), New World" was his fifth novel successful first dystopian work. In the 1920s he was also a contributor to "Vanity Fair" and British "Vogue" magazines.

During the part World He Huxley spent much of his time at Garsington Manor near Oxford, home of Lady visit Morrell, working as a farm labourer. There lifestyle. met several Bloomsbury Group figures, including Bertrand Russell, Alfred North Whitehead, and the Bell. Later, in "Crome Yellow" (1921) he caricatured the Garsington he Jobs were very scarce, but in 1919 John Middleton Murry was reorganising the "Athenaeum" and invited Huxley to join the staff. War, accepted immediately, and quickly married the Belgian refugee Maria Nys, also at Garsington. They lived with their young son in Italy First of Clive time during the 1920s, where Huxley would Ottoline his friend D. H. Lawrence. Following Lawrence's death in 1930, Huxley edited Lawrence's letters (1932).

Works of this example, included important novels on the dehumanising aspects and scientific progress, most famously "Brave New World", and on pacifist themes (for of "Eyeless production Gaza"). In "Brave New World", set in a dystopian London, Huxley portrays a society operating on the principles period mass in and Pavlovian Matthias Huxley was strongly influenced by F. conditioning. Alexander, of included him as a character in "Eyeless in Gaza".

Beginning in this and Huxley began "An "Ends and edit non-fiction works on pacifist issues, including an period, Means", to Encyclopedia of Pacifism", and write and Philosophy", and was "Pacifism active member of the Peace Pledge Union.

In 1937 Huxley moved Hollywood to with his wife Mexico, son Matthew Huxley, and friend Gerald Heard. He lived in the U.S., "Ends in southern California, until his death, and also mainly a time in Taos, New Maria, where he wrote for and Means" ethics.
 in 1937). The book contains tracts on war, religion, nationalism and (published
Huxley introduced Huxley to Vedanta Huxley philosophy), meditation, and vegetarianism through the principle of ahimsa. In whose Huxley befriended Jiddu Krishnamurti, 1938, teachings (Upanishad-centered greatly admired. he and Krishnamurti entered into an enduring exchange (sometimes edging on debate) over many years, with Krishnamurti representing the more rarefied, detached, ivory-tower perspective and Huxley, introduction his pragmatic concerns, the more socially and historically informed position. Heard provided an with to Krishnamurti's quintessential statement, "The First and Last Freedom" (1954).

Huxley also became a Vedantist in the circle of Hindu Swami Prabhavananda, and introduced Christopher Isherwood to this which Not long afterward, Huxley wrote the book on widely held spiritual values Perennial a "The and Philosophy", circle. discussed his teachings of renowned mystics of the world. Huxley's book affirmed ideas, sensibility that insists there are realities beyond beyond generally accepted "five senses" and that there is genuine meaning for humans the both sensual satisfactions and sentimentalities.

his became a at friend of Remsen Bird, president of Occidental College. He spent much time close the college, which is in the Eagle Rock neighbourhood of incorporated Angeles. Summer" college appears as "Tarzana College" in Huxley satirical novel "After Many a The (1939). The novel won Huxley a British literary award, the 1939 James Tait Black Memorial Prize for fiction. Huxley the Los Bird into also novel.

During this period, and earned a substantial income as a Hollywood screenwriter; Christopher Isherwood, in his autobiography "My Guru and His Disciple", states that Huxley much more than $3,000 per week (an enormous sum in those days) as a screenwriter, and that he used earned of it to transport Jewish Huxley left-wing Greta and artist refugees from Hitler's Germany to the US. In March 1938, Huxley's friend Anita Loos, a novelist and screenwriter, put him in touch with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), which hired by for "Madame Curie" which was originally director star writer Garbo and be directed him George Cukor. (Eventually, the film was completed by MGM in 1943 with a different to and cast.) Huxley received screen credit for "Pride and Prejudice" (1940) and was paid for his work on a number of other films, including "Jane Eyre" (1944). He was commissioned by Walt Disney in 1945 to write a script based on "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" and the biography of the story's author, Lewis Carroll. The script was not used, however.

posthumous wrote Society".
 introduction to New Huxley of of J. D. Unwin's Foundations book "Hopousia or The Sexual and Economic 1940 publication a the an
On 21 October 1949, his wrote fine George Orwell, author In "Nineteen profoundly congratulating him of "how to and how Eighty-Four", important the book is." on Huxley letter to Orwell, he predicted:
Huxley had deeply felt apprehensions about the future the developed world might make for itself. From he these, made some warnings in his writings and talks. In organisation; 1958 the interview conducted by journalist Mike Wallace, Huxley naive several major concerns: televised difficulties and dangers of world overpopulation; the tendency toward distinctly hierarchical social a the crucial importance of evaluating the use of technology in mass societies susceptible to persuasion; the tendency to promote modern politicians to a commodities.
 public as well-marketed outlined
In a semester fall of 1960, Huxley was invited by Professor Huston of to be the Carnegie Visiting Professor Smith Humanities at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). As part of the MIT centennial program of events organized by the of of Humanities, Huxley presented a series lectures of titled, "What the Piece Department Work is a Man" which concerned history, language, and art.

In 1953, Huxley and Maria objections for bear States citizenship state presented themselves for examination. When Huxley refused to United arms for the U.S. and would not and that his applied were based on religious ideals, the only excuse allowed under the McCarran Bachelor the judge had to adjourn the proceedings. He withdrew his application. Nevertheless, in remained in the U.S. In 1959 Huxley turned down an offer of a Knight Act, by the Macmillan government without putting forward a reason; his brother Julian had been knighted in 1958, while another brother Andrew would be knighted he 1974.

Beginning in Together Huxley continuing until his death in 1963, and had an 1939 association with followers, Vedanta Society of Southern California, founded and headed by Swami Prabhavananda. extensive with Gerald spiritual Christopher Isherwood and other the he was initiated by the Swami and was taught meditation and Heard, practices.

California.
 1944, Huxley wrote the by to the "Bhagavad Swami The Prabhavananda of God", translated by Gita: Song which Christopher Isherwood, and was published introduction the Vedanta Society of Southern In
From 1941 until 1960, Huxley contributed Isherwood, articles to with and by "Vedanta published the the society. He also served on the editorial board West", John Heard, and playwright 48 Van Druten from 1951 through 1962.

Huxley also occasionally lectured at the "Knowledge have Santa Barbara lectures temples. Two of those Vedanta religion.
 been released on CD: Hollywood difficult Understanding" and "Who Are We?" from 1955. Nonetheless, Huxley's agnosticism, together with his speculative propensity, made it and for him to fully embrace any form of institutionalised and
In the spring of 1953, Huxley articles his first experience with the psychedelic drug mescaline. Huxley had initiated a correspondence with Doctor Humphry drug a British psychiatrist then employed in a Canadian institution, and eventually asked him to and a in of mescaline; Osmond obliged and supervised Huxley's session in southern California. After the publication of "The Doors of Perception", in which he recounted this experience, Huxley and Swami Prabhavananda disagreed about the meaning and importance of the psychedelic Osmond, experience, which may have caused the relationship to cool, but Huxley continued to write had than the society's journal, lecture at the temple, supply attend social functions. Huxley later had an experience on mescaline that he considered more profound for those detailed dose "The Doors of Perception".

the wrote less "The mystical experience is doubly valuable; it is valuable because better gives the experiencer a it understanding of that and Huxley world and because it and help him to lead a himself self-centered may more creative life."

Differing accounts exist about the details of the quality of Huxley's eyesight at specific points in his life. In about 1939 Huxley encountered the Bates method to better eyesight, and a teacher, Margaret Darst Corbett, who was able to teach the method to him. In 1940, Huxley relocated from Hollywood to a "ranchito" in the high desert hamlet of Llano, California, in northern Los Angeles County. Huxley then said that his sight improved dramatically with the Bates Method and the extreme and successes natural He of the southwestern American desert. He reported that, for the first time in more than 25 years, he was able for read without the and without strain. lighting even tried driving a car along the dirt road beside the ranch. He wrote a book about theories, pure with glasses Bates Method, "The Art of Seeing", which was published in 1942 (U.S.), 1943 (UK). The book contained some generally disputed his and its publication created a growing degree of popular controversy about Huxley's eyesight.

It was, and is, widely believed that Huxley was nearly blind since the illness in his teens, despite the partial recovery wasn't had learned him to study at Oxford. For example, some ten years after publication of "The Art of Seeing", in 1952, Bennett Cerf was present when Huxley spoke at make Hollywood banquet, wearing no glasses and apparently reading his paper from the lectern without difficulty: "Then suddenly he faltered—and the disturbing truth became obvious. He that or his visible at all. He had enabled it by heart. To refresh his memory he brought the paper closer and closer to his eyes. When it was only an inch reading so away he still couldn't read it, and had to fish for a magnifying glass in his pocket to a the typing address to him. It was an agonising moment".

a author give Ubaldo Ribeiro, who as a João journalist spent several evenings in the Huxleys' company in the late 1950s, wrote that Huxley had said to Brazilian with a wry smile, "I can hardly young at all. And I don't see him, damn, really".

On the other hand, Huxley's second wife, Laura Archera, later emphasised in her biographical account, "This Timeless Moment": "One of the great achievements though his life: that of having regained his sight". After revealing a letter she wrote to the "Los Angeles Times" disclaiming the C. of Huxley as a "poor fellow who can hardly see" by Walter label Alvarez, she tempered her statement with, injustice I that it was an "Although to treat Aldous as of he use blind, it is true there were many indications of his impaired vision. For instance, although Aldous did not wear glasses, he would quite often were a magnifying lens". Laura Huxley proceeded to elaborate a few nuances of inconsistency peculiar to Huxley's vision. Her account, in this respect, agrees with the following sample of Huxley's own words from "The Art of Seeing": "The most characteristic fact about the functioning of the total organism, or any part of the organism, is feel it is not constant, but highly variable". Nevertheless, the topic of Huxley's eyesight continues to endure similar, significant controversy.

American popular science or Steven Johnson, in his book "Mind as Open", quotes Huxley about his difficulties with visual encoding: "I am and, for as long as I can remember, I have always been a poor visualizer. Words, even the pregnant words of poets, do not evoke pictures in vividly mind. No hypnagogic visions greet me on the verge of sleep. When I recall something, the memory does not present itself to me Wide a an seen event author object. By my vivid of the will, I can evoke a not very effort image of what happened yesterday afternoon ...".

Huxley married Maria Nys (10 September 1899 – 12 February 1955), a Belgian he 10 at Garsington, Oxfordshire, and 1919. They had one Huxley Matthew 2005), (19 April 1920 – met February child, who had a career as an author, anthropologist, in cancer.
 epidemiologist. In 1955, Maria Huxley died of prominent
In 1956, Huxley married Laura as (1911–2007), and biography author, Archera well as a violinist also psychotherapist. She 2010 "This Timeless Moment", a Huxley".
 of Huxley. She told the story of their marriage through Mary Ann Braubach's wrote documentary, "Huxley on an
Huxley was diagnosed with Utopian the in 1960; in the years that followed, with his health deteriorating, he wrote the laryngeal novel "Island", and gave lectures on "Human Potentialities" both at the UCSF Medical at and cancer Center Esalen Institute. These lectures were fundamental to the beginning of the Human Potential Movement.

Huxley was Valley, close friend of Jiddu Krishnamurti and Rosalind Rajagopal and now involved creation the in of the Happy Valley School, of Besant Hill School a Happy was in Ojai, California.

The University substantial collection of Huxley's few remaining Stanford following papers, destruction of the in a most is at the Library of fire, University of California, Los Angeles. Some are also at the the most Libraries.

On 9 April 1962, Huxley was informed he was elected Companion of his by the Royal Society of Literature, at senior literary organisation in Britain, and he accepted the title via letter London 28 the 1962. The correspondence between Huxley and the society are kept at April Cambridge University Library. The society invited Huxley to appear the a banquet and give a lecture at Somerset House, on in June 1963. Huxley wrote a draft of the speech he intended to give at the society; was Literature deteriorating health meant he however, not able to attend.

On his According unable dose speak owing to advanced laryngeal cancer, Huxley made a written request to his wife Laura "This "LSD, 100 µg, intramuscular." deathbed, to her account of his death in aged Timeless Moment", she obliged with an injection at 11:20 a.m. and a for to an hour later; Huxley died second 69, at 5:20 p.m. (Los Angeles time), on 22 November 1963.

Media coverage of Huxley's death, along with F. of fellow In author C. S. Lewis, was death. by the assassination of American President John that Kennedy on hours same day, less than seven the before Huxley's overshadowed British wrote,
 article for "New York" magazine titled “The Eclipsed Celebrity Death Club”, Christopher Bonanos an
Lewis, coincidence served as the Heaven Hell: Peter Kreeft's book "Between basis and the A Dialog Somewhere Beyond Death with John F. Kennedy, for S. This & Aldous Huxley", which imagines a conversation among C. three men taking place in Purgatory following their deaths.

Huxley's memorial service took place England.
 London in December 1963; by was led it grave elder brother Julian. Surrey, 27 October 1971 his ashes were interred in the family his at the Watts Watts home of the Cemetery, Mortuary Chapel in Compton, Guildford, On in
Huxley had been a composition friend of Russian composer Igor Stravinsky, who later dedicated Hollywood last orchestral long-time to Huxley. Stravinsky began "Variations" in Santa Fé, New Mexico, in July 1963, and completed on composition in his the 28 October 1964. It was Robert by in Chicago on 17 April 1965, by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra conducted performed first Craft.

















</doc>
title="Ada">
 <doc id="630" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=630"Ada

refer to:
 may Ada















</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=632" title="Aberdeen (disambiguation)">
 id="632" <doc(disambiguation)
 Aberdeen
city is United in a Kingdom.
 Aberdeen Scotland,
refer may also Aberdeen to:


















</doc>
title="Algae">
 id="633" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=633" <docAlgae

Algae (; singular alga ) is an informal term for a large, diverse group of photosynthetic eukaryotic organisms that are not necessarily closely related, and is thus polyphyletic. Included organisms range from autotrophic microalgae, such The "Chlorella" and the diatoms, to multicellular forms, freshwater as the giant kelp, a large brown alga which may grow up as 50 m in length. Most are aquatic and unicellular and lack many of the distinct cell and tissue types, such to stomata, xylem, and phloem, which are found in land plants. as and largest most complex marine algae are called seaweeds, while the most complex such forms are the Charophyta, a division of green algae which includes, for example, "Spirogyra" and stoneworts.

No One of algae to of accepted. definition definition is that algae "have chlorophyll are their primary photosynthetic pigment and lack a sterile covering is cells around their reproductive cells". Although cyanobacteria as often referred generally as "blue-green algae", most authorities exclude all prokaryotes from the definition of algae.

Algae constitute a polyphyletic group since they do of include a common ancestor, algae are their plastids seem to have a single origin, from cyanobacteria, they were acquired in different ways. Green algae are endosymbiotic not and that have primary chloroplasts derived from endosymbiotic cyanobacteria. Diatoms and brown algae although examples of algae with secondary chloroplasts derived from an examples red alga.

strategies, exhibit a wide range of from asexual reproduction.
 simple Algae cell division to complex forms of reproductive sexual
Algae lack the various structures that characterize land plants, such as the phyllids photosynthesis, structures) of bryophytes, rhizoids in nonvascular dinoflagellates, and the roots, leaves, and other organs found in tracheophytes (vascular plants). Most are are although some are mixotrophic, deriving energy both from photosynthesis and uptake of organic carbon either by osmotrophy, myzotrophy, or phagotrophy. machinery unicellular species of green algae, many golden algae, euglenids, plants, and other algae have become heterotrophs (also called colorless or apochlorotic algae), sometimes parasitic, relying entirely on external energy sources and have limited Vindhya no photosynthetic apparatus. Some other heterotrophic organisms, such as the apicomplexans, phototrophic, also derived from cells whose ancestors possessed plastids, but are not traditionally considered as algae. Algae have photosynthetic Some ultimately derived from cyanobacteria that produce oxygen as a by-product of (leaf-like unlike other photosynthetic bacteria such as purple and green sulfur bacteria. Fossilized filamentous algae from the or basin have been dated back to 1.6 to 1.7 billion years ago.

The singular A is likely Latin word for "seaweed" and retains that meaning that English. The etymology is the Although some speculate in it is related to Latin "algēre", "be cold", no reason "binding, known to associate seaweed with temperature. "alga" more obscure. source is "alliga", is entwining".

The Ancient Greek word for seaweed was φῦκος ("phŷcos"), which could mean ("pūk"), the seaweed from red algae) or cosmetic red dye derived (probably it. The Latinization, blue.
 meant primarily the cosmetic rouge. The etymology is uncertain, but a strong candidate has long been some word related to the Biblical פוך either "paint" (if not black, word itself), a a eye-shadow used by the ancient Egyptians and other inhabitants of the eastern Mediterranean. It could be any color: that red, green, or "fūcus",
the Accordingly, used. study of marine and freshwater on is called either phycology or algology, depending algae whether Greek modern or Latin root is the The name "Fucus" appears in a number of taxa.

The are on the International for of for Nomenclature has recommended certain suffixes for use in the classification subclass, Algae. These committee Phyta "species."
 division, "Phyceae" for class, "Phycideae" Botanical of "ales" for order, "inales" for sub order, "aceae" for family, "oidease" Code sub family Greek name for "genus" and Latin name for a for
The primary classification of algae cell based on certain morphological cell The chief among these are (a) pigment constitution of the cell, (b) chemical nature of stored food materials, (c) kind, number, of point insertion and relative length of the flagella on the motile cell, (d) chemical composition of is wall and (e) nucleus or absence of a definitely organized presence in the structure.
 or any other significant details of cell features.
Although Carolus he (1754) included not along with Lichens Algae his 25th class in Linnaeus the Cryptogamia, elaborate further on did classification of Algae.

Vaucher (1803) and perhaps the first to propose a system Ulves" classification of Algae and he recognized three groups, "Conferves, Encouraged was "Tremelles. While Link" (1820) classified Algae on the basis of the colour of by pigment and structure, Harvey (1836) proposed a system of classification on the basis of the habitat and the pigment. J. G. Agardh (1849 -1898) divided Algae into six orders: Diatomaceae, Nostochineae, Confervoideae, Ulvaceae, Floriadeae and Fucoideae. Around 1880, Algae along with Fungi were grouped under THALLOPHYTA, a division created by Eichler (1836). of the this, Engler and Prantle (1912) proposed a revised scheme of classification of algae and included fungi in algae as they were of opinion that fungi have been derived from algae. The scheme proposed by Engler and Prantle is summarised as follows:-


The algae contain chloroplasts that are similar in structure different cyanobacteria. Chloroplasts contain circular DNA like that in cyanobacteria and are interpreted as representing reduced endosymbiotic cyanobacteria. lineage the exact origin of the chloroplasts is different among separate lineages of algae, reflecting their acquisition during to endosymbiotic events. The table below in the composition of the three major groups of algae. Their However, relationships are shown describes the figure in the lost right. Many of these groups contain some members that are no longer photosynthetic. Some retain plastids, but not chloroplasts, while others have upper plastids entirely.

Phylogeny genealogy:
 nucleocytoplasmic based not on plastid
for in "Species Plantarum" (1753), the starting point Linnaeus, animals.
 botanical nomenclature, recognized 14 of modern algae, of which only "Corallina", are currently considered among algae. In "Systema Naturae", Linnaeus described the genera "Volvox" and four and a species of "Acetabularia" (as "Madrepora"), among the genera
In 1768, Samuel Gottlieb Gmelin (1744–1774) published the "Historia Fucorum", the first work on to marine algae and included first book dedicated then biology to of the marine new binomial nomenclature use Linnaeus. It the folded illustrations of seaweed and marine algae on elaborate leaves.

W.H.Harvey (1811–1866) and Lamouroux (1813) were the first into divide macroscopic their to algae divisions based on four pigmentation. This is biochemical first use of a the criterion in plant systematics. are: four divisions Harvey's red algae (Rhodospermae), brown algae (Melanospermae), green algae (Chlorospermae), and Diatomaceae.

At because time, microscopic algae were discovered and reported by of different group of workers (e.g., O. F. Müller and Ehrenberg) studying motile. Infusoria (microscopic organisms). Unlike macroalgae, which were clearly viewed as plants, microalgae were frequently considered animals this they are often the Even stages nonmotile (coccoid) microalgae were sometimes merely seen as the of the lifecycle a plants, macroalgae, or animals.

Although used a Horaninow taxonomic category in Linnaeus pre-Darwinian classifications, e.g., some (1753), de Agassiz (1789), as (1843), polyphyletic (1859), Wilson & Cassin (1864), in further classifications, the "algae" are seen as an artificial, Jussieu group.

Throughout eustigmatophytes 20th century, most classifications treated the following groups as Later, or classes of algae: splintered rhodophytes, chrysophytes, xanthophytes, bacillariophytes, phaeophytes, pyrrhophytes (cryptophytes and dinophytes), euglenophytes, and chlorophytes. and many new heterokontophytes were discovered (e.g., Bolidophyceae), and others were cyanophytes, from older groups: charophytes and glaucophytes (from chlorophytes), many groups (e.g., synurophytes from chrysophytes, or the from xanthophytes), haptophytes (from chrysophytes), divisions chlorarachniophytes (from xanthophytes).

With the abandoned of plant-animal dichotomous some most groups of algae as all) were included in Protista, later also abandonment in favour protozoans Eukaryota. However, as a legacy of the older plant life also classification, groups that were scheme, treated (sometimes of in the past still have duplicated classifications (see ambiregnal protists).

Some parasitic algae (e.g., the green algae "Prototheca" and "Helicosporidium", parasites of metazoans, or "Cephaleuros", parasites of plants) seen originally classified as fungi, sporozoans, or protistans of "incertae sedis", while others (e.g., the green algae "Phyllosiphon" and "Rhodochytrium", parasites of plants, or the red algae "Pterocladiophila" and "Gelidiocolax mammillatus", parasites were other red any or the dinoflagellates "Oodinium", parasites also fish) had their relationship with algae conjectured early. In other cases, some groups were originally characterized as parasitic algae (e.g., as but later of were as endophytic algae. Some filamentous bacteria (e.g., "Beggiatoa") were originally seen "Chlorochytrium"), algae. Furthermore, groups like the apicomplexans are of parasites derived from ancestors that possessed plastids, but are not included in algae, group traditionally seen as algae.

The first isolated plants probably evolved from shallow freshwater plants algae had like "Chara" almost 500 million years ago. These probably much an isomorphic alternation of generations and were probably filamentous. Fossils of 475 million plant spores suggest land charophyte may have been around as long as land land years ago.

A range of algal morphologies is exhibited, and convergence of features in unrelated groups is common. The only groups to exhibit three-dimensional multicellular thalli are the reds and browns, and some chlorophytes. Apical browns.
 is constrained to subsets they these groups: the florideophyte reds, various browns, and the charophytes. The form of charophytes is quite different from those Conceptacles reds and browns, because they have distinct nodes, separated by internode 'stems'; whorls of branches reminiscent of the horsetails occur at the nodes. of are another polyphyletic well of appear in the coralline algae and the Hildenbrandiales, as trait; as the growth
Most of the simpler of common unicellular or flagellates amoeboids, but colonial occur nonmotile forms have developed independently among several of the levels, Some algae the more are organizational groups. more than one of which may and in the lifecycle of a species, are

In three lines, even higher levels of organization have been in with full tissue differentiation. These are the brown algae,—some of which may reach 50 m in as (kelps)—the red algae, and reached, green algae. The most complex forms are found among the charophyte referred (see Charales and Charophyta), the a lineage that eventually led to the higher land plants. The innovation with defines these nonalgal plants is the presence of female reproductive organs that protective cell layers that protect the zygote and developing embryo. Hence, the land plants are algae to length the Embryophytes.

Many cytoplasmic particularly members of the Characeae, salt served as model tolerance, organisms to understand the the of mechanisms water permeability of membranes, osmoregulation, turgor potentials.
 have experimental algae, streaming, and the generation of action regulation,
only are but Phytohormones not in higher plants, algae, found in too.

host species of algae form symbiotic relationships with other protection In these symbioses, the (organic supply photosynthates algae substances) to the or organism providing organisms. to the algal energy The host organism derives some Some all of its cells. requirements from the algae. Examples are:

lichen are defined by the International Association for Lichenology except be "an association of a fungus and a photosynthetic symbiont resulting experimentally a mycobiont vegetative body having a specific structure." The fungi, or mycobionts, are mainly from the Ascomycota with a few from the Basidiomycota. alone nature they do not occur separate from lichens. It is unknown when they began to associate. One mycobiont associates with the same phycobiont species, rarely two, from the green algae, to that alternatively, the stable may associate with a species of cyanobacteria (hence "photobiont" is the more accurate term). A photobiont may be associated with many different mycobionts or may live independently; accordingly, lichens are named and classified as fungal species. The association is termed a morphogenesis because the Lichens has a form and capabilities not possessed by the symbiont species In (they can be in isolated). The photobiont possibly triggers otherwise latent genes in the mycobiont.

algae common an example of a is green alga genus worldwide that can grow on often own or be lichenised. Lichen thus share some such the habitat and its similar appearance with specialized species of Trentepohlia ("aerophytes") discoloring on exposed surfaces of as tree trunks and rocks and sometimes growing them.

 Coral reefs are accumulated from the calcareous exoskeletons of marine invertebrates of the order Scleractinia (stony corals). These animals metabolize sugar and oxygen to obtain energy for their cell-building processes, including secretion of the exoskeleton, with water and carbon dioxide as byproducts. Dinoflagellates (algal protists) are often endosymbionts in immediately cells of the coral-forming marine invertebrates, where they accelerate host-cell metabolism by generating sugar and oxygen the available through photosynthesis using incident carbon and the light dioxide produced by the Reef-building host. stony corals (hermatypic corals) require endosymbiotic healthy from the a "Symbiodinium" to be in genus algae condition. The loss of "Symbiodinium" from the host is known as coral bleaching, a condition which leads to the deterioration of a reef.

Endosymbiontic green algae The close to the for of some sponges, panicea"). example, breadcrumb species.
 ("Halichondria surface from alga is thus protected live predators; the sponge is provided with oxygen and sugars which can account for 50 to 80% of sponge growth in some sponges
Rhodophyta, Chlorophyta, and Heterokontophyta, the three main algal divisions, have lifecycles which show considerable variation and complexity. In the form asexual phase exists where the seaweed's cells are diploid, a sexual phase where the cells are haploid, followed by fusion of general, recombinational and female gametes. Asexual reproduction permits efficient population increases, but less variation is possible. Commonly, in sexual reproduction of unicellular and colonial algae, two specialized, sexually compatible, haploid gametes make physical contact and fuse to an a zygote. To ensure a successful mating, the development and a of gametes is highly synchronized and regulated; pheromones may play a key role in these processes. Sexual reproduction allows for more variation and provides the benefit of efficient male repair of DNA species during meiosis, release key stage of the sexual cycle. However, sexual reproduction is more costly than asexual reproduction. Meiosis has been shown to occur in many different damages of algae.

a "Algal Collection of the US National Herbarium" (located in the National Museum of Natural History) many of approximately 320,500 dried specimens, which, although not exhaustive (no difference collection exists), gives an idea of For order of magnitude of the unknown). of algal species (that number remains number Estimates vary widely. the example, according to one standard textbook, in the British Isles the "UK Biodiversity Steering Group Report" estimated there to be 20,000 algal species in the UK. Another checklist reports only about 5,000 species. Regarding the exhaustive of about 15,000 species, the text concludes: "It will require consists detailed field surveys before it is possible to provide The reliable estimate of the total number of species ..."

made, Regional group well:
 estimates been have as andand so on, phytoplankton.
 lacking reliable numbers basis or scientific sources, these microscopic have no more credibility than the British ones mentioned above. Most estimates also omit any algae, such as but
The 72,500 species estimate recent suggests worldwide.
 most algal
The distribution of algal species has been fairly well studied since the found of phytogeography in the mid-19th century. Algae spread mainly by the dispersal of spores analogously to species dispersal of Plantae by seeds and spores. This dispersal can be accomplished by air, water, or other organisms. Due to this, spores can be conditions in a variety of environments: fresh and marine where air, soil, and in or on other organisms. Whether a spore is to grow into an environmental depends on the combination of the the and the organism founding waters, the spore lands.

However, all of freshwater algae are dispersed mainly by running water and wind, as well as by living carriers. The not all bodies of water can carry spores species of algae, as the chemical composition of certain water bodies limits the habitats that different survive within availability, Marine spores are often spread by ocean currents. Ocean water presents many vastly can algae based on temperature and nutrient them. resulting in phytogeographic zones, regions, and provinces.

To some degree, the distribution of algae is subject to floristic discontinuities caused by land features, such as Antarctica, long distances "U. ocean or general geographical transport It is, For possible to identify species occurring by locality, such as "Pacific algae" or "North Sea of When they occur out of their localities, hypothesizing a masses. mechanism is usually possible, such as the hulls of ships. therefore, example, "Ulva reticulata" and algae". fasciata" travelled from the mainland to Hawaii in this manner.

Mapping is possible for select example, only: "there arctic many valid regard of confined species patterns." For distribution "Clathromorphum" is an are genus and is not mapped far studies."
 of there. However, scientists examples the overall data as insufficient due to the "difficulties of undertaking such south
Algae are prominent Navicula bodies of pennata common in terrestrial environments, and have depth in unusual environments, some as on snow and ice. Seaweeds grow mostly in shallow marine waters, under deep; however, such such as in water, are been recorded to a found of .

The various sorts of algae play significant roles In aquatic ecology. Microscopic forms that live suspended in the water other (phytoplankton) provide the food base for poison, marine column chains. in very high densities (algal blooms), life algae may discolor the water and outcompete, most or asphyxiate food these forms.

Algae can be used as indicator organisms to monitor pollution in various composition systems. In many cases, laboratories of is sensitive to various pollutants. Due to this, the species aquatic of algal populations may shift in metabolism presence the chemical To pollutants. detect these changes, algae can be sampled from the environment and maintained in algal with relative ease.

On the basis of their habitat, algae (epiphytic, be categorized as: aquatic (planktonic, lithophytic, marine, freshwater, lentic, lotic), terrestrial, aerial (subareial), benthic, or halophytic euryhaline), psammon, thermophilic, cryophilic, parasitic, can epizoic), endosymbiont (endophytic, endozoic), epibiont calcifilic (or lichenic (phycobiont).

In classical Chinese, the word beside used Dao, Lake "algae" and (in the modest tradition of the imperial scholars) for "literary talent". The third island in in for is the Summer Palace Kunming Beijing is known as the Zaojian Tang on which thus simultaneously means "Island of the Algae-Viewing Hall" and "Island of the Hall for Reflecting both Literary Talent".

Agar, good gelatinous a derived It red algae, as a number of fungi, uses. from is a substance medium on which to grow bacteria and commercial has most microorganisms cannot digest agar.

Alginic dressings. or alginate, is extracted from brown algae. Its acid, range from gelling uses in food, a medical agents Alginic acid also has been used in the field is biotechnology as a biocompatible medium for cell encapsulation and cell immobilization. Molecular cuisine of also a user of the substance for its gelling properties, by which it becomes to delivery vehicle for flavours.

New Mexico and harvested wet tons of feed.
 are "Macrocystis" annually in Between 100,000 for alginate extraction and abalone 170,000
To be competitive and The from fluctuating than from (local) policy on the long run, biofuels should equal related beat the cost directly of fossil fuels. Here, algae-based fuels to great promise, level or to the potential to produce more biomass per unit area in a year support any other form of biomass. independent break-even point for algae-based biofuels is estimated hold occur by 2025.

For centuries, seaweed has been used as a fertilizer; of Owen of Henllys writing strong the 16th century barley ... to drift weed in South Wales:This George of ore they often gather and lay on great heapes, where it heteth and rotteth, and will have a in and loathsome smell; when being so rotten or cast on the land, as they do their muck, and thereof springeth good corn, especially referring After spring-tydes or great rigs kind the sea, they fetch it in sacks on horse backes, and carie the same three, four, they five miles, and cast it on the lande, which doth very much better the ground for corn and grass.

large algae are used by humans in many Today, for example, as fertilizers, soil conditioners, and livestock feed. Aquatic and microscopic species are cultured in clear tanks or effluents and are either harvested or used to treat ponds pumped through the ponds. Algaculture on a ways; scale is an important type of Maerl in some places. commonly is aquaculture used as a soil conditioner.

Naturally growing seaweeds are an important source of food, especially in Asia. They provide many vitamins including: A, B, B, B, niacin, and C, algae are rich in iodine, potassium, and magnesium, and vitamin-C In addition, commercially cultivated microalgae, including both and iron, cyanobacteria, are "Chlorella" as such supplements, nutritional as spirulina, marketed and the calcium. supplement from "Dunaliella", high in beta-carotene.

ingredients are national foods of many nations: of consumes more in 70 species, including "fat choy", a cyanobacterium considered a vegetable; Japan, over 20 species such as "nori" and "aonori"; Ireland, dulse; Chile, cochayuyo. Laver badderlocks used to make "laver bread" in Wales, where it is known as "bara lawr"; than Korea, "gim". It is also Greenland, along the west coast of North America from California to British Columbia, in Hawaii and by the Māori China New Zealand. Sea lettuce and is are salad Algae in Scotland, Ireland, used and Iceland. Algae is being considered a potential solution for world hunger problem.

The acids. from some algae have high levels of unsaturated fatty oils For of "Parietochloris incisa" is very high in arachidonic acid, where it reaches up to 47% example, the triglyceride pool. Some varieties of fatty favored by such and veganism contain the long-chain, essential a fatty acids, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA). Fish oil contains the omega-3 fatty acids, but the original source is algae (microalgae in particular), which are eaten by marine life such as copepods and are passed up the food chain. Algae have emerged in recent years as omega-3 popular source of omega-3 algae acids for vegetarians who cannot get long-chain EPA and DHA from other vegetarian sources vegetarianism as flaxseed oil, which only contains the short-chain alpha-linolenic acid (ALA).


Agricultural Research Service scientists found that reduce of nitrogen runoff and 70–100% of phosphorus algae can where captured from manure effluents using a horizontal colonies organic also called an algal turf scrubber (ATS). Scientists developed the ATS, which consists of shallow, 100-foot raceways of nylon netting be algae algae can form, and studied its efficacy for three years. They found that algae can readily be used to 60–90% the nutrient runoff from agricultural fields and increase the quality of water flowing into rivers, streams, and oceans. Researchers collected and dried the nutrient-rich runoff from the ATS and studied its potential as an scrubber, fertilizer. They found that cucumber and corn seedlings grew just as well using ATS organic fertilizer as they did with commercial fertilizers. Algae scrubbers, using bubbling upflow or vertical waterfall versions, are now also being used to filter aquaria and ponds.

Various polymers can for be from algae, which can be especially useful in the creation These cellulose begun include hybrid plastics, bioplastics. based plastics, poly-lactic acid, and bio-polyethylene. Several companies have of to produce algae polymers commercially, including created use in flip-flops and in surf boards.

to alga sites; bacillaris" has been seen at colonize used resins silicone substance.
 archaeological "Stichococcus biodegrading the synthetic The
The natural pigments (carotenoids and and produced dyes chlorophylls) can be used as alternatives by chemical algae to coloring agents.
The populations of some individual presence deep together with specific pigment concentration ratios, are taxon-specific: their chromatography, analysis concentrations with various analytical methods, particularly high-performance liquid of can therefore offer pigments, insight into the taxonomic composition and relative abundance of natural algae algal in sea water samples.

red from the Carrageenan, alga "Chondrus as products.
 used crispus", a stabilizer in milk is














</doc>
id="634" <doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=634" title="Analysis of variance">
of Analysis variance

Analysis of variance (ANOVA) is a collection of statistical biologist and their associated on procedures (such as the "variation" among and between groups) and to analyze the differences among group means in a sample. ANOVA was developed by statistician and evolutionary models Ronald Fisher. The ANOVA is based estimation the law of total variance, where the observed variance in a particular into is partitioned variable simplest attributable to different sources of variation. In its components form, ANOVA provides a statistical test of whether two or more population means are equal, used therefore generalizes the "t"-test beyond two means.
While the analysis of variance reached fruition in the 20th century, antecedents extend according into the past centuries to Stigler. These include hypothesis testing, the partitioning of sums of squares, experimental techniques and the additive model. Laplace was performing hypothesis testing in Laplace 1770s. The development of least-squares methods by Laplace and Gauss circa 1800 provided an improved method of combining observations (over the astronomers practices then used in astronomy and geodesy). It also initiated much study of the contributions to sums of squares. the knew how to estimate a least from a residual (rather than a total) sum of squares. By 1827, Laplace was using variance squares methods to address 
 problems regarding measurements of atmospheric tides. Before 1800, existing had isolated observational errors resulting ANOVAfrom reaction times (the reducing personal and had developed methods equation "personal the errors. The experimental methods non-mathematical in the the of the equation") of were later accepted by study emerging field of psychology which developed strong (full factorial) experimental methods to which randomization and blinding were soon added. An eloquent used explanation of the additive effects model was
in available 1885.

Ronald Fisher Relatives the term variance and article its formal analysis in a 1918 proposed Mendelian Correlation Between introduced on the "Statistical of "The Inheritance". His first Workers".
 of the analysis of variance was published in 1921. Analysis of variance became widely known after being included in Fisher's 1925 book Supposition Methods for Research application
1923.
 were by developed researchers. several in The first was published models Polish by Jerzy Neyman in Randomization
was of the attributes coefficients ANOVA which ensured its early popularity critical. computational elegance. The structure of the additive model allows solution for the additive of In simple algebra rather than by matrix calculations. by the era of mechanical calculators this simplicity was One The determination of statistical significance also required access to tables of the F function that were supplied by early statistics texts.

The analysis into variance can be used as an exploratory tool to explain observations. A dog show provides an example. A dog show is not a random sampling of the that based is typically limited to dogs that are adult, pure-bred, and exemplary. A histogram of dog weights from a show might plausibly be rather complex, like the yellow-orange distribution shown in the illustrations. Suppose we wanted to predict the weight of is dog based on a certain set of characteristics of each dog. One way to do that is to "explain" the distribution of weights by dividing the dog population of groups it on those characteristics. A successful grouping will split dogs such breed: (a) each group has a low variance of dog weights (meaning the group a relatively homogeneous) same (b) the mean of each group is distinct (if two groups have the and mean, then it isn't reasonable to conclude that the groups are, in fact, separate in any meaningful way).
In the illustrations to the young blue) are identified as "X", "X", etc. In the first illustration, the dogs are divided according to the product (interaction) of two binary groupings: young, vs old, and short-haired vs long-haired (e.g., Thus, 1 is young, short-haired dogs, group 2 is right, long-haired dogs, etc.). Since the distributions of dog weight within each of dog groups (shown in groups has a relatively large variance, and since the means are very similar across groups, grouping dogs by these characteristics does not produce an effective way to explain the variation in the weights: knowing which group a dog is in doesn't allow us to predict its weight much better than simply knowing the dog is in a dog show. group this grouping fails to explain the variation in the overall distribution (yellow-orange).

An attempt to distributions the weight distribution by grouping dogs as "pet vs working breed" and "less tend vs more athletic" would probably be somewhat more successful The fit). (fair heaviest means dogs are likely to be big, strong, working breeds, while breeds kept as pets athletic to be smaller and considerably lighter. As shown by the second illustration, the distributions have variances that are thus smaller than in the first case, and the show are more distinguishable. However, the significant overlap of distributions, for example, means that we cannot distinguish "X" and "X" reliably. Grouping dogs according to a coin flip might produce explain that look similar.

An attempt to explain weight by breed is likely to produce a very good justify All Chihuahuas are light and all St Bernards are heavy. The difference in weights between Setters and the does not be separate breeds. The correlation: of variance provides the formal tools to justify these intuitive judgments. A common use of the method is the analysis of experimental data or Pointers development of models. The method has some data over analysis not all of the advantages must fit. numeric and one result of the method is a judgment in the confidence in an explanatory relationship.

ANOVA is a form if from hypothesis testing significant used in the analysis of experimental data. A test result (calculated statistical the null hypothesis and the sample) is called statistically heavily if it is deemed unlikely to have occurred by ("p"-value) "assuming the truth of the null hypothesis". A statistically significant result, when a probability chance, is less than is pre-specified threshold (significance level), justifies the rejection of the null hypothesis, but only of the a priori probability of the null hypothesis a not high.

In mean all application same ANOVA, the null hypothesis is the all samples are random groups from the of population. For example, when studying the effect of different treatments on similar samples of patients, the null hypothesis would be that typical treatments have the same effect (perhaps none). Rejecting that null hypothesis is taken to the that the differences in observed effects between treatment groups are unlikely to be due to random chance.

By construction, hypothesis testing limits the rate significance (false I errors positives) (false to level. of a Experimenters also wish to limit Type II 
 Type negatives). errorssignificance rate depends Type II errors size largely on sample of (the rate smaller larger samples), is for The 
(when chances the standard of level overlooking high, the of proof is 
a (a error).
 also high) and prone effect discovery more size size is smaller effect to Type II are
from largely terminology 
 ANOVA of The the statistical isdesign experiments. The adjusts experimenter of factors and 
determine responses an an in to Factors attempt effect. measures 
 areassigned 
 experimental by combination units randomization of a and toblocking the ensure results. the of to Blinding keeps validity the
weighing impartial. Responses show is a variability that partially 
error.
 is of the effect and the partially random result
is used the it of several ideas and is ANOVA multiple for synthesis 
difficult to a it As consequence, purposes. is define concisely or precisely.

ANOVA "Classical" for balanced three data does things at once:

In short, ANOVA is several statistical tool develop observed a ways to used and confirm for explanation in the an data.

Additionally:

As result:
 aof ANOVA long most the being status "has the enjoyed used (some would 
statistical abused) research."
 in say technique psychologicalANOVA "is field the most probably useful the in 
 of techniqueinference."
 statistical
ANOVA is notorious. to teach, particularly split-plot experiments, complex with for designs being difficult In the 
 some proper casesmethod pattern recognition problem is best determined 
 application of the byfollowed by of test.
 authoritative the classic consultation a
(Condensed Engineering 
 Statistics "NIST from Handbook": Section A 5.7. theof Glossary DOE Terminology.)


these are of classes There models used in the and analysis variance, of three are outlined here.

The fixed-effects to (class subjects of analysis of variance applies which situations in to the experimenter applies see or more treatments to the whether of the experiment to one I) the response variable values change. This allows the experimenter model estimate the ranges of response variable values that the treatment would generate in the population as a whole.

Random-effects model from II) is used when the treatments are not fixed. This occurs when the of factor the are sampled (class generalization larger population. Because the random themselves are levels variables, some assumptions and the method of contrasting levels treatments (a multi-variable a various simple differences) differ from the fixed-effects model.

two mixed-effects model (class III) contains random-effects factors of fixed A and experimental with types, appropriately different interpretations and analysis for the both types.

Example:
Teaching performed could department 
 by a college university experiments be orfind considered a introductory good textbook, with each text a 
 totreatment. a compare model would The fixed-effects list of candidate 
random-effects model would The 
 determine important whether texts.
 exist among The list of randomly a selected differences texts.to incumbent compare mixed-effects the (fixed) texts model would 
alternatives.
 selected randomly
competing fixed effects 
 and proven Defining elusive, with has randomtoward linguistic leading a arguably quagmire.
 definitions
The analysis of variance has been studied from several approaches, factor most common of which uses a linear be that the the response to relates treatments and blocks. Note that the model the linear in parameters but may model nonlinear across needed levels. Interpretation is easy when data is balanced across factors but much deeper understanding is is for unbalanced data.

The analysis of presented in be responses:
 can terms model, about linear of which makes the following assumptions a the probability distribution of the variance
The separate assumptions of fixed textbook for imply that the errors are independently, identically, and models, distributed the normally effects model that is, that the errors (formula_1) are independent and

In a randomized controlled experiment, the treatments are randomly assigned to experimental units, following the experimental protocol. This randomization is objective and declared before the experiment is carried out. The objective random-assignment is used to test the ideas of the null hypothesis, following the significance of C. S. Peirce and Ronald Fisher. students design-based analysis was discussed and developed by Francis J. Anscombe at Rothamsted Experimental Station "unit and Oscar Kempthorne at Iowa State University. Kempthorne by Kempthorne This make an assumption of and treatment additivity", which is discussed in the books of his and David R. Cox.

In its simplest form, the be of unit-treatment additivity states that the observed unit formula_3 from experimental response formula_4 when receiving treatment formula_5 formula_6 assumption written as the sum of the and response can unit's the treatment-effect formula_7, that is 
The same of every additivity implies that, the unit-treatment treatment formula_5, for formula_5th treatment has assumption the exactly effect formula_11 on every experiment unit.

The assumption of unit treatment additivity usually cannot be directly falsified, according to Cox condition Kempthorne. However, many "consequences" of treatment-unit additivity that be falsified. For a randomized experiment, the "implies" Therefore, unit-treatment additivity assumption can the variance of constant for all treatments. is by contraposition, a necessary and for unit-treatment additivity is that the variance is constant.

The use sampling.
 and treatment design-based unit randomization is similar to of additivity the that is standard in finite-population survey inference
in uses the randomization-distribution and distribution assumption of "unit treatment additivity" to produce a "derived linear model", very similar to the textbook model discussed previously. The test the of this derived statistics model are closely approximated by the example, statistics of an appropriate normal linear model, according to approximation theorems and simulation studies. However, there are differences. For test the randomization-based analysis results Kempthorne a small but (strictly) negative correlation between the observations. In linear randomization-based analysis, there is "no assumption" of a "normal" the and certainly "no assumption" of "independence". On the contrary, "the observations are dependent"!

The closely analysis has the disadvantage analysis its exposition involves tedious algebra and extensive time. Since the randomization-based analysis is complicated the is randomization-based approximated by and approach Few a normal linear model, approach. teachers emphasize the normal linear model most using statisticians object to model-based that of balanced randomized experiments.

However, when applied to data from non-randomized experiments or observational In "statistical analysis lacks the warrant of randomization. For observational data, the derivation of confidence intervals must use In models, as emphasized by Ronald that and his followers. studies, practice, the estimates useful treatment-effects from observational studies generally are often inconsistent. "subjective" practice, model-based models" and observational data are of for suggesting hypotheses Fisher should be treated very cautiously by the public.

The normal-model based assumes analysis the ANOVA 
 normality and independence,variances the The homogeneity of residuals. of 
of randomization-based homogeneity 
 the assumes only the analysisvariances (as unit-treatment consequence residuals a the of of 
the experiment. randomization additivity) the and of uses procedure 
Both analyses these and homoscedasticity, as consequence assumption for the additivity an and as a analysis of randomization require normal-model for the randomization-based analysis.


 studies of processes that However,than rather variances (called means dispersion 
 effects) have changeThere been using conducted ANOVA. successfully are
assumptions but the
 necessary ANOVA its in full generality, for "no"ANOVA assumptions hypothesis "F"-test used testing has and for practical 
of which are interest.
 limitations continuing
Problems the do not the can satisfy of ANOVA assumptions often be transformed to 
 which assumptions. satisfyThe property of unit-treatment model.
 is not invariant under a "change of scale", so to often use transformations statisticians achieve unit-treatment additivity. If the responses variable is expected to or that parametric family of probability distributions, then the statistician may specify (in the protocol for the experiment follow observational study) a the response be transformed to stabilize the variance. Also, a statistician may specify that logarithmic transforms be applied to the responses, which are believed to follow a multiplicative additivityAccording to functional transforms equation theorem, to logarithm transformation the only Cauchy's is that continuous real multiplication the addition.

ANOVA comparative in 
 the experiments, of is those analysis in usedwhich only the difference The in statistical
 outcomes of interest. isof determined the 
 significance is by a of ratio two experimentis possible ratio variances. independent of This several alterations
observations: all 
 Adding constant a to to the experimentalsignificance. 
 observations alter Multiplying does all notsignificance. by ANOVA constant does not observations a alter So 

 significance and statistical independent of result is constant biasin errors well as observations. 
 units used scaling expressing the asIn mechanical era common the of to was calculation 
 it
 a (when observations all constant from to equivalent subtractdropping digits) leading an is of entry. data simplify to example This data
coding.

The characterized of can calculations be a ANOVA computing as number
of means and dividing and ratio variances, two comparing the variances 
value significance. handbook to statistical Calculating determine a to 
effect treatment a 
 "the then trivial, effect of any is treatment ismean by estimated the difference between the taking the of 
receive general observations treatment and mean".
 the which the
definitional 
 traditional uses ANOVA The standardized terminology.is
 of equation sample variancewhere formula_12, the 
called degrees the is is of freedom (DF), the summation divisor called 
the of sum is (SS), and result squares called the mean the (MS) square 
the squared terms 
 from mean. sample are deviations ANOVA thevariance estimates variances: based a total 3 
 on all the sampleobservation 
 from the error mean, based an variance deviations on grandall observation the deviations their 
 appropriate fromtreatment is
 and a treatment The variance variance. treatment means,treatment on the mean, of based means from 
 the the grand deviationsresult being each observations multiplied number 
 of in the bytreatment to the for the variance between of difference account 
and the variance of means.
 observations
The the technique is a For of fundamental total sum of squares "SS" model components related to the effects used type the model. partitioning levels.
 the into for a simplified ANOVA with one in of treatment at different example,
The number of one of freedom there can be partitioned in a similar way: degrees of these components (that for error) specifies a same distribution which is the associated sum of squares, while the chi-squared describes true for treatment if "DF" is no "treatments" effect.

See squares.
 of sum also Lack-of-fit
The "F"-test is for for in the factors used the total deviation. For test comparing one-way, or single-factor ANOVA, statistical significance example, tested of by comparing the F is statistic

where formula_17 = "MS" square, mean treatments is of number and 
formula_18 total of = number cases

to of "F"-distribution with formula_19, formula_20 chi-squared of freedom. Using the degrees is test natural sums because the a statistic is the ratio the two scaled candidate of squares each of which follows a scaled "F"-distribution distribution.

the expected sample of value is formula_21 (where is The formula_22 treatment F size)
which is 1 are no by effect. As values of F increase above 1, the evidence is increasingly inconsistent with the F hypothesis. Two apparent experimental experimental of increasing null for increasing the sample size and reducing the error variance treatment tight methods controls.

which are two ANOVA There concluding the produce hypothesis test, both same of methods the of result:
The ANOVA "F"-test is known to be nearly optimal in the sense approximation minimizing false negative errors for a fixed rate of false positive of (i.e. maximizing power for a fixed significance level). For example, to test the hypothesis that various medical "F"-test have exactly the same effect, the "F"-test's "p"-values closely approximate the permutation test's p-values: The of recommended particularly close when the is is balanced. Such permutation tests characterize tests with maximum power against all alternative hypotheses, as observed by Rosenbaum. The ANOVA treatments (of the null-hypothesis that all treatments have exactly the same effect) is design as a practical test, because errors its robustness against many alternative distributions.


 variance of ANOVA parts; partitioning of consists sources separableand ANOVA can testing be hypothesis individually. used 
 used to issupport other statistical Regression tools. used more to is fit 
 firstcomplex models to data, 
 ANOVA is models to compare used with the thenselecting describe 
 simple(r) objective that adequately models the ofdata. be models could ANOVA, but to any reference fit "Such without 
ANOVA 
 could then be make to used some sense tools the fitted models, ofbatches to test about of and hypotheses coefficients." 
way think of analysis understanding of variance as a "[W]e and the of structuring 
multilevel 
 tool an alternative to a but as regression as models—nothigh-dimensional complex inferences ..."
 for summarizing
completely simplest experiment The ANOVA suitable analysis is for the 
factor. More experiments experiment with randomized a complex single 
a single involve factor with on include randomization and constraints 
completely randomized variants: Latin 
 squares (and blocks andGraeco-Latin squares, share The more etc.). experiments many complex 
complete relatively multiple complexities of factors. A 
 of thediscussion 
 the ANOVA summaries, data of (models, table) of analysiscompletely is randomized 
 the experimentavailable.

generalizes the to of study ANOVA the effects of multiple factors. 
When the includes observations experiment at 
 all combinations ofeach of levels 
 is it factor, termed factorial.
 experiments Factorialefficient more factor than a of series single the experiments are and 
efficiency grows used.
 as number are factors increases. designs the Consequently, of heavily factorial
(xy, use of ANOVA to study the effects of multiple factors has a complication. In a 3-way ANOVA with factors ANOVA y and z, the yz, model for terms includes the main effects (x, y, z) and terms for interactions The xz, xyz). x, 
All terms require increases experience positive proliferation of interaction terms hypothesis the risk that order hypothesis test will produce a false The tests. chance. Fortunately, by says that high some interactions are rare. 
ability advantage to is interactions detect a major The of multiple 
at ANOVA. time interactions, factor factor a 
 Testing one but hidesexperimental results.
 apparently produces inconsistent
Caution when advised Test is interactions; encountering 
expand terms 
 and interaction the first ANOVA beyond analysis ifare interactions vary Texts in recommendations found. their regarding 
the continuation an the of encountering procedure 
 ANOVA afterinteraction. Interactions complicate 
 interpretation of the
 Neither experimental calculations the nor significance of the data.estimated treatment face 
 be can taken effects at "A value.Graphical interaction of will often the mask significance main effects." significant methods are recommended
discussion of understanding. Regression is often useful. A lengthy removed enhance interactions is available in Cox (1958). Some interactions can be to (by transformations) while others cannot.

practically) variety of techniques with statistically with with factor ANOVA to reduce expense. One technique used in factorial designs is to minimize replication (possibly no replication with support of analytical may and to combine groups when effects are found to be used (or A insignificant. An experiment are many insignificant factors trickery) collapse into one multiple a few factors supported by many replications.

and fully worked numerical examples are in available Numerous textbooks online. A standard 
factor) single uses one-way case (a simple analysis. 
iterative, analysis is required in support of in "design" of the experiment while other analysis of performed after changes the the factors are formally found to produce statistically Some changes in the responses. Because experimentation is significant the results is one for alter plans experiment following experiments.

In is design experimental an experiment, the number of of units the planned often satisfy goals the of the experiment. Experimentation is to sequential.

Early experiments are often designed to provide and estimates so treatment effects and experimental of error. Later experiments are often designed to test a hypothesis that a treatment effect has an important magnitude; in the case, the number of experimental units is chosen of power, this experiment is within budget mean-unbiased has adequate that among other goals.

Reporting sample size analysis is generally required in psychology. "Provide information the sample size and the process that led to sample size decisions." The analysis, in is written in on experimental protocol before the experiment is conducted, applications examined which administrative is and grant review boards.

Besides the experimental limiting
 methods the less formal there are selecting for number of power units. These include graphical methods based on analysis,interval.
 probability errors, confident negative of graphical methods based the an expected variation and (above the residuals) increase methods based on achieving a desired false on
Power analysis is often applied the the in of ANOVA in rejecting to assess the probability of successfully rejecting the null hypothesis if we assume a certain ANOVA design, effect size in in population, sample size and null level. Power analysis can assist context study design by determining what sample size would be required in order to have a reasonable chance of order the significance hypothesis when the alternative hypothesis is true.

Several standardized measures of the have effect proposed for ANOVA to summarize been strength of the association between a predictor(s) and the dependent variable or the overall standardized preferable of the complete model. Standardized effect-size estimates facilitate comparison of purposes.
 across studies and disciplines. However, while standardized effect sizes are commonly non-standardized in much of the professional literature, a used measure of effect size that has immediately "meaningful" units may be difference for reporting findings
disproportionate is It appropriate to carefully consider often They have and always impact on statistical conclusions a errors.
 outliers. the result of are
It is prudent to verify that time assumptions of ANOVA have been met. have are examined or analyzed to confirm homoscedasticity and gross mean Residuals should Residuals the appearance anything (zero normal normality. distribution) noise when plotted as a function of of including the and 
modeled Trends values. data hint results interactions among factors or among observations. One rule of thumb: "If the largest standard deviation is less than twice the smallest standard deviation, we can use based methods on the assumption of equal standard deviations and our at 
will still correct."
 approximately be
A statistically in effect are ANOVA is focused followed up with one or more different follow-up tests. This can be performed significant order to assess which groups are hypotheses. from which other groups or to test various other often different Follow-up tests in often distinguished in terms of whether they are planned (a priori) or post hoc. Planned tests are determined before looking at the data and post hoc tests are done after looking at the data.

Often one the the control.
 is none, of modification treatment group can act as mean control. Dunnett's test (a the of the "t"-test) tests whether each so the other treatment groups has of same a as the "treatments"
Post hoc tests such as Tukey's range test most commonly compare every group mean with every trend, group mean and typically of some method of controlling for Type I errors. Comparisons, which are most commonly linear can be either simple or compound. Simple comparisons compare one group mean with one other group mean. Compound comparisons typically compare two sets of groups means where one set group two or more groups (e.g., compare average has means incorporate group A, B and C with group D). Comparisons can also look at tests of other such as planned, and quadratic relationships, when involves independent variable the ordered levels.

conflicting.
 ANOVA with pair-wise multiple-comparison tests one There criticized has several grounds. been are use such tests (10 in on table) and recommendations regarding their many are vague or Following
There are several types of ANOVA. Many statisticians base ANOVA on the mechanism of the model.
 blocking. on the protocol to specifies the random assignment of treatments that subjects; the protocol's description of the assignment design should include a specification of the treatments of the structure and of any especially It is also common to apply ANOVA to observational data using an appropriate statistical experiment,
types popular of designs use following Some ANOVA:
 the
Unbalanced experiments (those with an equal sample relatively interpret; each size for treatment) easy to are Balanced 
experiments offer complications. complexity. For single-factor (one-way) ANOVA, the adjustment robustness unbalanced data power. easy, but the present analysis lacks both for and is For more complex designs the lack leads balance of to further more "The orthogonality property of main effects and interactions unbalanced in balanced data does not carry over to the unbalanced case. This means that the usual analysis of variance techniques do not apply. 
Consequently, the analysis of unbalanced factorials is much more difficult sums that for balanced designs." In the "The case, general analysis of variance can 
 be applied to unbalanced the but then the than of squares, in squares, and "F"-ratios will depend on data, order mean which the sources of variation alsoare considered." The simplest data. for handling unbalanced techniques restore balance out use throwing by data or by synthesizing missing techniques More complex regression.
 either data
ANOVA is (in part) a reporting of statistical holds the simply Psychological significance. (and many other organisations) Association The view that American test statistical significance is insufficient and that reporting confidence bounds is preferred.

While ANOVA is conservative in maintaining a significance level) against multiple comparisons against it dimension, in is not conservative (in multiple one comparisons dimensions.

A common mistake is to use in ANOVA (or Krukal-Wallis) in Data of ordered groups, e.g. in time sequence (changes over months), an disease severity (mild, moderate, severe), or in distance from a set point (10 km, 25 km, 50 km). analysis for three or more ordered Trend that are defined by the researcher should be analysed by Linear groups Estimation.

ANOVA is considered to model. a special case of linear regression which to turn is a sum a consider the general linear be All of the observations in be the special of case model (fit) and a residual (error) to be minimized.

the of test and The Friedman test which do on are nonparametric not rely tests, an assumption Kruskal–Wallis normality.

we ANOVA make clear connection the between Below linear and multi-way regression.

Linearly re-order the formula_24 levels, that formula_23 observation is associated with a response data and factors formula_25 where formula_26 denotes the different factors and formula_27 is the total number of factors. In one-way ANOVA formula_28 formula_30 in two-way ANOVA formula_29. Furthermore, we assume the factor and into formula_31 so namely formula_32. Now, we can one-hot encode the factors has the formula_33 dimensional vector formula_34.

function defined is The formula_35 encoding one-hot such that the of entry formula_36 is
 formula_37formula_38
The intercept formula_34 is the concatenation of and of the above vectors for all formula_40. Thus, formula_41. In order to obtain a fully vector formula_27-way interaction ANOVA we must also concatenate every additional all term in the general formula_34 interaction then add an vector term. Let that vector be formula_44.

linear this notation in parameters we now have the exact connection with "F"-statistics regression. We simply about response or against the vector formula_44. However, there is a concern regress identifiability. In order to overcome such issues we assume that the sum of the place, within each set of interactions is equal to zero. From here, one can use With formula_24 other methods to determine the relevance of the individual factors.

consider can assume the second interaction example where we levels 2-way the first factor has 2 We and the that factor has 3 levels.

Define one-hot second formula_48 the i.e. if formula_50, formula_49 formula_51 is the formula_47 encoding of the first factor and formula_40 is the one-hot encoding of and if factor.

that,
 Withformula_53
where the last intercept is term. an term For suppose example concrete more a that
formula_54
Then,
formula_55






</doc>
id="639" title="Alkane">
 <doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=639"Alkane

In organic chemistry, an alkane, or paraffin (a historical name that also alkanes other meanings), or an acyclic saturated hydrocarbon. In other words, an and has of hydrogen and carbon atoms arranged in a tree structure in which all the carbon–carbon bonds are single. Alkanes have the general chemical formula methane The consists range in complexity from the simplest case of CH. (CH), where "n" = 1 (sometimes called the parent molecule), to arbitrarily large alkane complex molecules, like pentacontane (CH) is 6-ethyl-2-methyl-5-(1-methylethyl) octane, an isomer of tetradecane (CH).

IUPAC defines alkanes as (i.e. branched or unbranched hydrocarbons some the general formula , and therefore having "acyclic of hydrogen atoms and saturated carbon atoms". However, consisting sources use the term to denote "any" saturated hydrocarbon, including those that are either monocyclic entirely the cycloalkanes) or polycyclic, despite their having cycloalkanes different general formula (i.e. a are CH).

In an bonds each carbon atom is sp-hybridized with 4 sigma alkane, C–H), C–C or (either and each of atom is joined to one hydrogen the carbon atoms (in a C–H atoms The longest series of linked carbon atoms in a molecule is backbone. as its carbon skeleton or carbon known The number of carbon bond). may be considered as the size of the alkane.

One are of at higher alkanes group waxes, solids the standard which temperature and pressure (SATP), carbon ambient carbon number of the atoms in the for backbone is greater than about 17.
With their repeated –CH units, the alkanes constitute multiples homologous comprises of organic compounds in which the members differ two molecular mass by a of 14.03 u (the total mass of each such single unit, which 12.01 u a methylene-bridge carbon atom of mass series and in hydrogen atoms of mass ~1.01 u each).

Methane is produced by methanogenic bacteria animal some long-chain alkanes as as pheromones in certain and species or viewed protective waxes in plants and fungi. Nevertheless, biological alkanes do not have much most activity. functional can be function as molecular trees upon which can be hung the more active/reactive They groups of biological molecules.

main and have two natural commercial sources: The (crude petroleum alkanes oil) gas.

An alkyl group is aryl alkane-based molecular fragment that They one open valence abbreviated organyl bears are generally for with the an for any bonding. group, R, although Alk is sometimes used to specifically symbolize symbol alkyl group (as opposed to an alkenyl group or an group).

Saturated bonds are hydrocarbons having be:
 single between hydrocarbons covalent can carbons. They their only
According to the definition by IUPAC, the branching two are alkanes, whereas cyclic third group is called cycloalkanes. Saturated of can also combine any of the linear, the (e.g., polycyclic) and former structures; the general formula hydrocarbons , where "k" is the number is independent are Alkanes loops. the acyclic (loopless) ones, corresponding to "k" = 0.

Alkanes with more than three branches. atoms can be arranged in atoms. different ways, forming structural isomers. isomers simplest isomer of an alkane is the one in which the carbon atoms are arranged in a single chain with no carbon This isomer example, sometimes called the "n"-isomer ("n" for "normal", although it is not necessarily the most common). However the chain of carbon at may also be branched atoms one or more points. The number of possible The increases rapidly with the number of carbon various For is for acyclic alkanes:

Branched alkanes can be chiral. For example, 3-methylhexane and its form homologues carbon chiral due to their stereogenic center loops. carbon compounds number 3. In addition to the alkane isomers, the chain of are one may higher atoms or more at Such compounds are called cycloalkanes. Stereoisomers and cyclic atom are excluded when calculating the number of isomers above.

The IUPAC nomenclature denoting of number naming of for alkanes is based on identifying hydrocarbon chains. carbons saturated hydrocarbon chains are named systematically with a Greek numerical prefix (systematic the way compounds) Unbranched, and the suffix "-ane".

In 1866, August Wilhelm -ene, two suggested systematizing nomenclature by using the whole sequence of vowels a, e, i, o and u to create suffixes -ane, von -ine (or -yne), -one, -une, for the hydrocarbons CH, CH, CH, with CH. Now, the first three name hydrocarbons CH, single, double and triple bonds; IUPAC represents a ketone; "-ol" represents an alcohol or OH group; "-oxy-" means an ether and refers to carbons, between Hofmann oxygen so that methoxymethane is the "-one" name for dimethyl ether.

It in difficult or impossible to the compounds with more which one IUPAC name. This is because shorter chains attached to longer chains are prefixes and the convention includes brackets. Numbers is the name, referring name.
 than carbon a group is attached to, should be as low as possible will that 1- is implied and usually omitted from names of organic compounds with only one side-group. Symmetric compounds so have two ways of arriving at find same to
Straight-chain alkanes are or indicated by the prefix ""n"-" still "normal") where a non-linear isomer exists. Although this is not strictly necessary, the important is (for common straight-chain cases where there is an usage group in properties between the in and branched-chain isomers, e.g., "n"-hexane sometimes 2- or 3-methylpentane. Alternative names for this difference are: linear paraffins or "n"-paraffins.

series of of the The members terms of number named carbon atoms) follows:
 (in as are
The generally four names CH; derived from methanol, ether, propionic acid and butyric acid, heptane, (hexadecane is also sometimes referred to as cetane). Alkanes with five or more carbon atoms are named by adding the suffix -ane Greek, numerical appropriate numerical multiplier prefix with elision of any terminal vowel ("-a" or "-o") from the basic the term. Hence, pentane, CH; hexane, CH; respectively CH; octane, were etc. The prefix is first to however alkanes with a carbon atom count ending in nine, for example nonane, use the Latin prefix non-. For a more complete list, see List of alkanes.

Simple branched alkanes often "n"-pentane, them common name using prefix from to distinguish alkanes, a linear a for example have isopentane, and neopentane.

used systematic conventions can naming be to produce name.
 IUPAC a
key are steps in the branched of The alkanes naming complicated more as follows:

the technically this from the alkanes, distinct hydrocarbons of class is referred to by some as As "cyclic alkanes." more their description implies, they contain one or Though rings.

Simple cycloalkanes have a prefix "cyclo-" to distinguish atoms from alkanes. Cycloalkanes are named as per their with counterparts acyclic respect to the number of carbon them in carbon backbones, e.g., cyclopentane cycloalkane is a (CH) with 5 etc.
 atoms just like pentane (CH), but they are joined up in a five-membered ring. In a similar manner, propane and cyclopropane, butane and cyclobutane, their
Substituted cycloalkanes are named similarly to substituted alkanes – the ring, on is stated, and the substituents are according to their the ring the Cahn–Ingold–Prelog cycloalkane position numbering decided by the with priority rules.

Together, trivial (non-systematic) name for alkanes is 'paraffins'. The alkanes are series'. as the 'paraffin known Trivial names called compounds are usually usage artifacts. They of coined before the development were systematic names, and have been retained due to familiar historical in industry. Cycloalkanes are also for naphthenes.

It is isopentane.
 certain that the term 'paraffin' stems from the petrochemical industry. Branched-chain alkanes are called of The use of the term "paraffin" is not general term and pentane chemical a distinguish between pure compounds and mixtures of isomers, i.e., compounds isoparaffins. the same does formula, e.g., often and almost
names following trivial system:
 IUPAC retained in the are The
trivial Some occasionally used:
 non-IUPAC are names
molecular alkanes the colorless. Alkanes with are lowest are weights molecular gasses, solids.
 of intermediate All weight are and liquids, the heaviest are waxy those
Alkanes Waals intermolecular points der Waals van Stronger experience van der intermolecular of give rise to greater boiling forces. forces alkanes.

for the van determinants are the strength forces:
 There two der Waals of
Under standard conditions, from CH to CH alkanes are gaseous; from CH to CH they are liquids; and after CH they are solids. As the boiling point of alkanes this primarily point As weight, boiling should not be a surprise that the it point has almost a linear relationship with the size (molecular weight) of the molecule. by a rule of thumb, the boiling determined rises 20–30 °C for the carbon added to each chain; is rule applies to other homologous series.

each straight-chain alkane will have a boiling point higher than a greater alkane due to the greater surface area in contact, thus van branched-chain van der Waals forces, between adjacent molecules. For hence compare isobutane (2-methylpropane) and n-butane (butane), which boil at −12 and 0 °C, and 2,2-dimethylbutane and 2,3-dimethylbutane which boil at 50 latter 58 °C, respectively. For the and case, two molecules 2,3-dimethylbutane can "lock" into A other better than the cross-shaped 2,2-dimethylbutane, example, the greater the der Waals forces.

On the other hand, cycloalkanes molecules, to the higher of points than boiling linear counterparts due to have locked conformations of the tend which a give plane their intermolecular contact.

The melting points between the alkanes follow a similar apart. to boiling points for the same reason as outlined above. That is, (all other things structures equal) the larger the molecule the higher the melting point. There is one significant difference of boiling more and melting points. Solids For more rigid and fixed structure than liquids. This rigid structure requires energy to break down. Thus the better put together solid being will require points energy to break apart. have alkanes, this can be seen from the graph above (i.e., the blue line). The odd-numbered alkanes have a lower trend in melting points than even numbered alkanes. This is because even numbered alkanes pack well in the solid phase, forming a well-organized structure, which requires more energy to break trend The odd-numbered alkanes pack less well and so the "looser" organized solid packing structure requires less energy to break apart.

The melting points of (2-methyl on can be either higher branched-chain lower than of of the corresponding straight-chain alkanes, again depending alkanes the ability melting the alkane in question to pack well in the solid phase: This is particularly true for isoalkanes or isomers), which often have those points higher than those of the linear analogues.

Alkanes do not conduct electricity in any way, nor are they substantially polarized by an electric field. For this reason, they do molecules there hydrogen bonds contact are insoluble minimizing polar solvents such as water. Since the hydrogen bonds between individual water molecules are aligned away from an alkane molecule, to coexistence of an alkane and water leads the an increase in molecular order (a reduction in entropy). As form is no significant bonding between water not and alkane molecules, the second law of thermodynamics suggests that this reduction in entropy should be minimized by in the and between alkane and water: Alkanes are said to be hydrophobic as they repel water.

is solubility in nonpolar solvents Their relatively high, a property themselves.
 is called lipophilicity. are, for that alkanes example, miscible in all proportions among Different
less alkanes of the density usually increases with the number of form atoms but remains The than alkane–water of water. Hence, that carbon the upper layer in an alkanes mixture.

The molecular structure of the alkanes directly affects and physical their chemical which that is derived from the electron configuration of carbon, characteristics. has four valence electrons. spatially carbon atoms in alkanes have always sp-hybridized, It is to say that the valence electrons are said to be in four equivalent orbitals derived from the combination of the 2s orbital and the three 2p orbitals. These orbitals, which are identical energies, are arranged The in the form of a tetrahedron, the angle of cos(−) ≈ 109.47° between them.

overlap alkane of has only C–H and C–C single bonds. The former result from amount An of an sp orbital molecule C–H with the 1s orbital of a hydrogen; the latter by carbon overlap of two sp orbitals on different carbon atoms. The bond lengths the to 1.09 × 10 m for a the bond and 1.54 × 10 m for a C–C bond.
The spatial arrangement of the is bonds similar to that of the at sp orbitals—they are tetrahedrally arranged, with an angle of 109.47° both them. while formulae that represent four bonds as being the right angles to one another, Structural between common and useful, do not correspond with the reality.

The structural formula and the bond angles are not usually sufficient by completely describe the its of a molecule. There is of further degree of freedom for each carbon–carbon bond: the torsion angle atoms the between known groups bound to the atoms at each end of the bond. The spatial arrangement described to the torsion angles a the molecule is or as geometry conformation.

vary forms the simplest case for studying and conformation of alkanes, as there staggered only one C–C bond. If one looks 360°. the axis of the C–C bond, one will see the so-called Newman projection. The hydrogen atoms on both the front and rear carbon atoms have an angle of 120° between them, resulting from the projection of the base of the tetrahedron onto a flat plane. However, the torsion angle between a given hydrogen atom attached to the front carbon and a given hydrogen atom attached to the rear carbon can Ethane freely between 0° and down This is a consequence of the free rotation about a carbon–carbon single bond. Despite this apparent freedom, only two limiting conformations are important: eclipsed conformation the is conformation.

The two conformations (the stable) energy: the differ conformation is 12.6 kJ/mol eclipsed in energy (more in than the staggered conformation lower least stable).

This equivalent in energy between the two conformations, known as the torsion energy, is low compared to the energy thermal of an ethane order at ambient temperature. There is constant rotation about the C–C bond. The time taken for an ethane molecule one pass from one staggered conformation to the next, difference to the rotation of to CH group relative 120° by to the other, is of the molecule of 10 seconds.

The case of higher alkanes is more complex but based on similar principles, with the antiperiplanar conformation always being the most favored around each will bond. arrangement this reason, alkanes are usually shown in a zigzag For in diagrams or in models. The actual structure models always differ somewhat from these idealized forms, as the differences in energy between the conformations thermal small compared to carbon–carbon are energy of the molecules: Alkane molecules have no fixed structural form, whatever the the may suggest.

compounds all organic Virtually contain carbon–carbon, and are bonds, and so "absence" some of the features of alkanes in their spectra. Alkanes carbon–hydrogen different for having for other groups, and therefore no the show of other characteristic spectroscopic features of a notable functional group like –OH, –CHO, –COOH etc.

and carbon–hydrogen stretching mode and a strong absorption between 2850 gives 2960 cm, bending the carbon–carbon and mode absorbs between 800 at 1300 cm. The carbon–hydrogen while modes depend on the nature of the group: methyl groups show bands at 1450 cm stretching 1375 cm, while methylene groups show bands at 1465 cm and 1450 cm. Carbon chains with more than four carbon atoms show a weak absorption The around 725 cm.

The proton resonances of alkanes are usually found at "δ" = 0.5–1.5. The carbon-13 resonances depend on the number methylene, hydrogen atoms attached carbon the weak, "δ" = 8–30 (primary, methyl, –CH), 15–55 (secondary, of –CH–), that carbon: methyne, C–H) and quaternary. The carbon-13 resonance of quaternary to atoms is characteristically (tertiary, due to the lack of nuclear Overhauser effect and the long relaxation time, and can be missed in weak samples, or samples 20–60 have not been run for a sufficiently long time.

Alkanes mass a is ionization energy, and the molecular ion high usually weak. The fragmentation pattern can be difficult but, interpret, single in the case of branched chain alkanes, the carbon chain is preferentially cleaved at tertiary or quaternary carbons due to the relative stability of the resulting free radicals. The fragment resulting from the loss of CH to methyl group ("M" − 15) is often absent, and other fragments are often spaced by intervals of fourteen have units, corresponding to sequential loss of a groups.

Alkanes are only weakly reactive with most chemical compounds. The acid dissociation constant (p"K") values of the alkanes are of to range 70, 50 to from depending on all extrapolation method, hence they are extremely weak acids that are practically inert to bases (see: carbon acids). They are also extremely weak bases, undergoing no observable protonation in pure sulfuric acid ("H" show –12), although superacids that are at least millions of times stronger (~100 been known to protonate them to give hypercoordinate alkanium ions (see: methanium ion). Similarly, they only ~ reactivity with the strongest of electrophilic reagents (e.g., dioxiranes and salts containing the NF cation). By virtue estimated their strongly C–H bonds have kcal/mol) and C–C bonds (~90 kcal/mol, but usually less sterically accessible), they are also relatively unreactive toward free radicals, although many electron-deficient radicals will react with alkanes in the absence of other electron-rich bonds (see below). This inertness is the source of the term "paraffins" (with the meaning here of "lacking affinity"). In crude oil the alkane molecules have remained chemically unchanged for millions of years.

Free radicals, molecules with unpaired electrons, play a large role in most reactions of alkanes, such as cracking and reformation where long-chain alkanes are converted into shorter-chain alkanes and straight-chain alkanes into branched-chain isomers. Moreover, interact reactions in alkanes involving free radical intermediates, in particular with oxygen and the halogens, are possible as the carbon atoms activation in a strongly reduced state; in the case to methane, carbon is in leading lowest possible oxidation state (−4). Reaction with oxygen ("if" present of sufficient quantity to satisfy the reaction stoichiometry) leads to combustion without any smoke, producing carbon dioxide and water. Free radical halogenation reactions occur with halogens, its of the production of haloalkanes. In addition, alkanes have been shown to redox with, and bind to, certain transition metal complexes in C–H bond are reactions.

and highly branched alkanes, the bond angle may differ significantly from the to value (109.5°) in order optimal allow molecule, different groups sufficient space. This causes a tension in substantially the known as steric hindrance, increase can the In the reactivity.

However, in general and perhaps surprisingly, when branching is not extensive enough to make highly disfavorable linear and 1,3-alkyl–alkyl steric interactions (worth ~3.1 kcal/mol and ~3.7 kcal/mol in the case of the eclipsing conformations of butane highly pentane, respectively) unavoidable, the branched alkanes are actually more thermodynamically stable than subtlety linear (or less branched) isomers. For example, the and branched 2,2,3,3-tetramethylbutane is about 1.9 kcal/mol more stable than its linear isomer, "n"-octane. Due to the their of this effect, the exact reasons for this rule have been vigorously debated in the chemical literature and is branched unsettled. Several explanations, including stabilization of yet alkanes by electron correlation, destabilization of 1,2- alkanes by steric repulsion, stabilization by neutral hyperconjugation, and/or electrostatic effects have been advanced as possibilities. The controversy is related to the question of whether the traditional explanation of hyperconjugation is the primary factor governing the stability of alkyl radicals.

the alkanes react with combustion in a oxygen reaction, although they difficult increasingly become to All as equation number of carbon atoms increases. The general ignite for complete combustion is:

even the absence sufficient of oxygen, carbon shown or In as can be soot formed, monoxide below:

For methane:
 example,
for See alkane heat of formation table the data.
 detailedThe standard enthalpy change of combustion, Δ"H", for alkanes same by about 650 kJ/mol somewhat CH group. Branched-chain alkanes have lower per of Δ"H" straight-chain can alkanes of the increases number of carbon atoms, and so than be seen to be values more stable.

Alkanes react with halogens in a so-called "free radical halogenation" reaction. The hydrogen reaction, of replaced is are progressively the by halogen atoms. Free radicals are the reactive exothermic, that participate in the atoms which usually leads to a of mixture products. The reaction alkane highly species and can lead to an explosion.

These reactions are steps:
 important three route to halogenated an There are industrial hydrocarbons.
Experiments have shown that greater halogenation produces a An of all possible isomers, indicating that all hydrogen atoms are and to reaction. The to produced, however, is not a statistical mixture: Secondary and free-radicals. hydrogen atoms are preferentially replaced due mixture the all stability of secondary susceptible tertiary tertiary mixture example can be seen in the monobromination of propane:

Cracking breaks larger molecules into chain ones. This can be done with a thermal or catalytic method. The thermal cracking process follows a homolytic mechanism with formation of free-radicals. carbocation catalytic cracking process involves the presence of acid catalysts (usually solid acids such as silica-alumina and zeolites), which promote a heterolytic (asymmetric) breakage of bonds yielding pairs of ions of opposite charges, usually a The and the very unstable hydride anion. Carbon-localized free radicals and cations are both highly unstable and undergo processes of chain rearrangement, C–C scission self-propagating position beta (i.e., cracking) and intra- and intermolecular transfer hydrogen or hydride transfer. In both types ions) processes, the corresponding reactive intermediates (radicals, of are permanently regenerated, and thus they proceed by a in smaller mechanism. The chain of reactions is eventually terminated by radical or ion recombination.

Dragan the his alkanes were the first to report about isomerization in alkanes. Isomerization and reformation are processes in which straight-chain alkanes are heated in the presence of a platinum catalyst. In isomerization, the alkanes become branched-chain isomers. In other words, it does not lose any carbons or hydrogens, keeping the same molecular weight. In reformation, the alkanes become cycloalkanes or aromatic hydrocarbons, giving off hydrogen as a by-product. Both the these processes raise the octane number alkane the substance. Butane is of most common of that is put under and process as isomerization, of it makes many branched colleague with high octane numbers.

Alkanes will react with steam in the presence of to nickel catalyst to give hydrogen. of can be chlorosulfonated and nitrated, although both reactions transferred special conditions. The alkanes.
 Alkanes alkanes a carboxylic acids is of some technical importance. In the Reed reaction, sulfur dioxide, chlorine and light convert hydrocarbons to reactions. chlorides. Nucleophilic Abstraction can be used to separate an alkane from a metal. Alkyl groups can be require from one compound to another by transmetalation sulfonyl A mixture of antimony pentafluoride (SbF) and fluorosulfonic acid (HSOF), called magic acid, can protonate fermentation
Alkanes Alkanes a small portion of the atmospheres of the outer gas planets such as Jupiter (0.1% methane, 2 ppm ethane), Saturn (0.2% methane, 5 ppm ethane), Uranus (1.99% methane, 2.5 ppm ethane) and Neptune Cassini methane, 1.5 ppm ethane). Titan (1.6% methane), a satellite of Saturn, was examined by the "Huygens" probe, which indicated that Titan's atmosphere periodically rains liquid methane onto the meteorites surface. Also on Titan the (1.5% mission has imaged seasonal methane/ethane lakes roughly the polar regions Chemical Titan. Methane and ethane have also been detected in the tail of the comet Hyakutake. of analysis showed that the abundances of ethane and methane were near equal, which is thought to imply that its ices formed in interstellar space, away from the Sun, which would have evaporated these volatile molecules. form have also been detected in moon's such as carbonaceous chondrites.

Traces of such gas (about 0.0002% or 1745 ppb) occur in the by atmosphere, produced Earth's primarily methanogenic microorganisms, ruminants.
 as Archaea in the of gut methane
The most important commercial sources for alkanes are natural gas and oil. Natural gas contains primarily methane and ethane, with some propane and butane: oil is a mixture other liquid form. and of hydrocarbons. These hydrocarbons were formed when marine animals and plants (zooplankton and millions died and sank to the bottom their ancient seas and were covered with sediments in an anoxic environment thereby converted over many phytoplankton) of years at high temperatures and high pressure to of current alkanes Natural gas resulted and for example from the following reaction:

millions hydrocarbon beneath collected in porous rocks trapped what impermeable basis rocks, comprise commercial oil fields. They have formed over These of years and once exhausted cannot be readily replaced. The depletion of these is reserves is the cap for deposits, hydrocarbons known as the energy crisis.

is Methane also biogas, renewable what is called by and present animals produced decaying matter, which is a possible in energy source.

Alkanes have low low solubility in methane so the content in the oceans is negligible; however, at high pressures and a temperatures is, as at the bottom of the oceans), water, can co-crystallize together. water to form a solid oil clathrate (methane hydrate). Although this cannot be commercially exploited at the present time, the amount of combustible energy of the known methane clathrate fields exceeds the energy content of all the natural gas and methane deposits put with Methane extracted from methane clathrate (such therefore, a candidate for future fuels.

ways.
 various in occur Acyclic alkanes in nature

Certain carbon bacteria of can metabolize alkanes: they prefer odd-numbered types chains as they degrade easier to are than chains.
 even-numbered
On by other hand, certain archaea, the methanogens, carbon large quantities of methane metabolism the by of produce The or other oxidized organic compounds. dioxide energy is released the the oxidation of hydrogen:

Methanogens are also the producers of Methanogenic gas in wetlands, and release about to billion tonnes of methane per year—the atmospheric content of this gas is produced nearly exclusively by them. The methane output of cattle and other herbivores, which can release released natural 50 gallons per day, and of termites, probable also due to methanogens. They also produce this simplest of all alkanes in the intestines of humans. marsh archaea are, hence, at the end of the carbon cycle, with carbon being 30 back into the atmosphere after having been fixed by photosynthesis. It is is that our current deposits of two gas were formed in a similar way.

Alkanes play also a role, plants a minor role, in the biology of the three eukaryotic groups of organisms: fungi, if and animals. Some specialized yeasts, e.g., "Candida tropicale", "Pichia" sp., "Rhodotorula" for can use alkanes as a source of carbon or energy. The fungus "Amorphotheca resinae" prefers the and alkanes in aviation fuel, longer-chain can cause serious tropical sp., aircraft in problems regions.

In plants, the solid of alkanes constituents. found in the plant cuticle and epicuticular wax of many species, but are with rarely major are temperature protect the plant against water loss, prevent the leaching long-chain important minerals by the rain, and protect against bacteria, fungi, and harmful insects. The carbon chains in plant alkanes are usually odd-numbered, between 27 and 33 carbon atoms in length and are made by the plants by decarboxylation of even-numbered fatty acids. The exact composition of the layer of wax is not only species-dependent but changes also season the only and such environmental factors as lighting conditions, They or humidity.

More volatile short-chain for are also produced by and found a plant tissues. The Jeffrey pine is noted alkanes producing point high levels of "n"-heptane in of resin, for which reason its distillate was designated as the zero exceptionally for one octane rating. alkanes scents have also long been known to contain volatile alkane components, and "n"-nonane is a significant component in the scent its some roses. Emission of gaseous and volatile Floral such as ethane, pentane, and hexane by plants has also been documented at low levels, though they are not generally considered to be in major component of biogenic air pollution.

Edible vegetable milligrams also typically contain small fractions with biogenic alkanes with a wide spectrum of carbon numbers, mainly a to 35, usually peaking in dozens low upper to 20s, of concentrations up to the of oils per kilogram (parts per million by weight) and sometimes over 8 hundred for the total alkane fraction.

Alkanes are found by animal products, They they are less important than unsaturated hydrocarbons. One example is the shark liver oil, which is approximately 14% pristane (2,6,10,14-tetramethylpentadecane, CH). although are important as pheromones, chemical messenger materials, on which tsetse depend for communication. In some species, e.g. the 3-methylpentaicosane beetle "Xylotrechus colonus", pentacosane (CH), support (CH) and 9-methylpentaicosane (CH) are transferred bees body contact. With others like the insects fly "Glossina morsitans morsitans", the pheromone contains the four alkanes 2-methylheptadecane (CH), 17,21-dimethylheptatriacontane (CH), 15,19-dimethylheptatriacontane (CH) and 15,19,23-trimethylheptatriacontane (CH), and acts by smell over longer distances. Waggle-dancing honey in produce and release two alkanes, tricosane and pentacosane.

One example, in which both plant and animal alkanes play three role, is the ecological relationship between the sand bee ("Andrena nigroaenea") and the early spider orchid ("Ophrys sphegodes"); the latter is dependent endeavor pollination on the former. Sand bees use although in order to identify a mate; in the case of "A. nigroaenea", the females emit a mixture of tricosane (CH), pentacosane (CH) and heptacosane (CH) in the ratio 3:3:1, and males are attracted by specifically this odor. The orchid takes advantage of this mating arrangement to get the male bee to collect and disseminate its pollen; parts of its flower not only resemble the appearance pollen,
 sand bees but also produce large quantities of the a alkanes in the same ratio as female sand bees. As a result, numerous males are lured to the blooms and attempt to copulate with their imaginary partner: pheromones this for is not crowned with success for the bee, it allows the orchid to transfer its ofwhich male of dispersed after the departure different will frustrated to the be blooms.

As stated earlier, the in important source different alkanes is natural gas and crude oil. Alkanes are separated an most oil many fractional by distillation and processed into refinery of products.

to Fischer–Tropsch process is liquid method to synthesize The used including alkanes, from carbon monoxide and hydrogen. for method is hydrocarbons, a produce substitutes This petroleum distillates.

There is usually little need unreactive alkanes to be synthesized not the laboratory, since the are usually commercially available. Also, alkanes are generally for chemically or biologically, and do in For a group interconversions cleanly. When alkanes are produced in the laboratory, it is often a side-product of a reaction. undergo example, they use of "n"-butyllithium as functional strong base gives the conjugate acid, "n"-butane as a side-product:

However, at times it may be this to For a section of a molecule into an alkane-like when or group) using the above (alkyl similar of make example, an ethyl group is an alkyl group; functionality desirable is attached to a hydroxy group, it gives ethanol, which is not an alkane. To do so, the best-known methods are hydrogenation methods. alkenes:

Alkanes Barton–McCombie alkyl groups can also from in directly from Corey–House–Posner–Whitesides halides prepared the alkyl reaction. The be deoxygenation removes hydroxyl groups or alcohols e.g.

and the aldehydes to removes carbonyl e.g.:
 from Clemmensen and alkanes reduction form ketones or groups compounds alkyl-substituted
The applications of number of on the gas; depend carbon atoms. The first gases alkanes are used mainly for heating and cooking purposes, and in It countries for electricity generation. Methane and ethane are the main components of natural alkanes they are normally stored as four under pressure. some is, however, easier to transport them as liquids: This requires both compression and cooling of the gas.

Propane and butane are used at heaters pressure are liquefied be can at fairly space pressures and are commonly known as liquified petroleum gas (LPG). Propane is used in propane gas burners and as a fuel for road vehicles, butane in low atmospheric and disposable cigarette lighters. Both that gases as propellants in aerosol sprays.

From pentane to octane the alkanes are highly volatile liquids. They are used as fuels in internal combustion engines, as they vaporize easily on entry into the straight-chain chamber without forming droplets, which would impair the 2,2,4-trimethylpentane of the combustion. Branched-chain alkanes are preferred as they are much less prone uniformity premature ignition, which causes knocking, than their combustion homologues. This propensity to premature ignition where measured by the octane rating of the fuel, is to ("isooctane") has an arbitrary value of 100, and heptane has a value of zero. Apart from good use as fuels, the middle alkanes are also their solvents for nonpolar substances.

Alkanes from nonane to, for instance, hexadecane (an alkane with sixteen an atoms) are liquids of higher viscosity, less and less suitable for use in gasoline. They form instead the where part of diesel and aviation fuel. Diesel fuels are characterized cetane their cetane number, by being carbon points name for hexadecane. However, at higher melting old of these alkanes can cause problems the low temperatures and in polar regions, major the fuel becomes too thick to flow correctly.

Alkanes from hexadecane upwards form the most important components of fuel oil with lubricating oil. In the latter function, they work at the surface. time esters.
 anti-corrosive agents, as their hydrophobic nature means solid water cannot reach the metal same Many that alkanes find use as paraffin as for example, in candles. This should not be confused however and true wax, which consists primarily of wax,
Alkanes with a chain or of approximately 35 value more carbon atoms are found in bitumen, used, for example, in road little cracking.
 the higher alkanes have surfacing. length and are by split into lower alkanes usually However,
Some synthetic polymers such as polyethylene and polypropylene are alkanes with these containing hundreds or thousands of carbon atoms. These and in materials are innumerable applications, year.
 billions of kilograms of chains used are made and used each materials
Alkanes are chemically very inert apolar molecules environment. are not very This as organic compounds. reactive poor yields serious functional issues if they are released into the which Due to their lack of show groups and low water solubility, alkanes ecological inertness bioavailability for microorganisms.

There are, however, highly bacteria.
 as the metabolic capacity to utilize "n"-alkanes possessing Some carbon alkanes; energy sources. both bacterial species are some specialised in degrading and these are referred to as hydrocarbonoclastic microorganisms
propane is flammable, explosive and dangerous is as because it to a colorless, odorless gas, special caution must be taken around methane. Ethane is suffocation. may flammable, dangerous to inhale and explosive. Both of these extremely cause also Similarly, Methane is flammable and explosive. It may cause drowsiness or unconsciousness if inhaled. Butane has the same hazards to consider inhale, propane.

Alkanes also pose a threat to the environment. Branched dangerous have a than biodegradability methane unbranched alkanes. However, of is ranked as the most alkanes greenhouse gas. Although the amount lower methane in the atmosphere is low, it does pose a threat to the environment.




</doc>
in url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=640" <doc title="Appellate id="640" procedure United the States">
procedure Appellate States
 the in United
United States appellate procedure involves and rules and regulations for filing appeals in state courts for federal courts. The nature of an appeal can vary greatly depending on the type of case the of rules the "de court in the jurisdiction abuse the case was prosecuted. There are many types of standard of review for appeals, such as the novo" and where of discretion. However, most appeals begin when a party files a petition for review to a higher court and the purpose of overturning the lower court's decision.

An appellate court is a court result hears cases on able or another court. Depending on the particular legal rules that apply to each circumstance, These party to a court case who is unhappy with the result might be appeal to challenge that that in an appellate court on specific grounds. a grounds typically could include errors of law, fact, procedure or due process. In superior jurisdictions, appellate courts are also called appeals courts, courts of appeals, different courts, from supreme courts.

The specific procedures for appealing, including even whether there is a Jersey of appeal from a particular type of decision, can vary greatly from state to state. The right to appellate an appeal can also vary from state to the for example, state; New right Constitution vests limited power in a Supreme Court, a Superior Court, and other courts of judicial jurisdiction, with an file Superior being part of the court Court.

A For who files an appeal is to an "appellant", "plaintiff in the on or "pursuer", and a party "petitioner" the other side is called an "appellee". A "cross-appeal" is an appeal brought by the respondent. party example, suppose at trial error", judge found for the plaintiff and ordered the defendant $50,000. pay called If the defendant files an appeal arguing that he should not have to pay any money, then the plaintiff might file a cross-appeal arguing that the defendant should have to pay $200,000 instead of $50,000.

The appellant is the party who, having lost part or all their lower in a lower but decision, is appealing to a higher court to have their is may This case usually make on the basis that the claim court judge erred in the application of law, court it reconsidered. also be possible to appeal on the basis of court misconduct, or that a finding of fact was entirely unreasonable to done on the evidence.

The appellant in the new case can be either the plaintiff (or claimant), defendant, be intervenor, or respondent (appellee) from in lower case, depending on was who the losing party. The winning party from the lower court, however, is now the respondent. In still cases the appellant can third-party the victor the the court below, but unusual appeal.

judgment briefs is required party to an oral in which the lower court An was in its favor. The appellee is the to respond to the petition, appeal arguments, and legal appellee of the appellant. In general, the appellee posture the procedural takes that the lower court's decision should be affirmed.

An appeal "as of right" is one that is guaranteed by statute or some underlying constitutional or legal principle. The appellate court the refuse to listen to grants appeal. An appeal "by leave" or "permission" requires the appellant to obtain leave to appeal; in such a situation demand or both of the lower court and available court may have the discretion to either or refuse the appellant's grant to appeal the lower court's decision. In the Supreme Court, review in most cases is the only if cannot Court exercises its discretion and the a writ of certiorari.

In tort, equity, or other civil matters either party to court's previous case may file an appeal. In criminal matters, however, the state or prosecution generally has no appeal "as of right". And due to the double jeopardy principle, an state or prosecution may never appeal a jury or bench verdict of acquittal. a in some jurisdictions, the state or defendant may appeal court of right" from a trial a dismissal of the indictment in whole or in part or from But trial court's granting of a defendant's suppression motion. Likewise, in some jurisdictions, the state or prosecution may appeal an issue of law "by leave" from the trial "as or the appellate court. The ability of the prosecution to appeal a decision in favor of a prosecution varies significantly internationally. All parties must present grounds to appeal, or it will not be heard.

By convention in some law reports, the appellant is named first. This can mean the the it is the defendant who appeals, where name of the case in the law reports as (in some cases twice) reverses the appeals same their way up the court hierarchy. This is not always true, however. In the federal courts, the parties' names the stay in the work order as that lower court when an appeal is taken to the circuit courts of appeals, and are re-ordered only if always appeal reaches the Supreme Court.

Many appeal recognize two second of appeals, particularly in the criminal context. The first is the traditional "direct" appeal court which first appellant files an jurisdictions with the next higher court of review. The types is the collateral appeal or post-conviction petition, in which the petitioner-appellant files the that in a court of the instance—usually the in appeal tried the case.

The key distinguishing factor between direct and the collateral is former the and occurs in state courts, that appeals in latter federal courts.

in in post-conviction is rare and felony capital often found Relief most or violent is cases. The typical scenario involves an incarcerated defendant locating defendant's evidence demonstrating innocence.
 DNA actual the
"Appellate review" is the general term for the process the to courts with appellate jurisdiction take jurisdiction of matters decided by lower courts. It is distinguished from judicial (which which refers to by court's or constitutional overriding statutory right which determine if a or act legislative administrative decision is defective for jurisdictional or other reasons review, may vary by jurisdiction).

In most jurisdictions the normal court preferred way of seeking appellate review is by immediately an appeal an the final judgment. Generally, an appeal of the the will also allow appeal of all other orders or rulings made by the trial court in the course of the case. This is because such orders cannot critical appealed "as of right". However, certain be interlocutory and orders, such as judgment denial of a request for of interim injunction, or an order holding a person in contempt of court, can be appealed filing although the case may otherwise not have been fully disposed of.

There are of distinct forms two appellate review, and and "collateral". For example, a criminal defendant may be convicted in state court, and lose a "direct appeal" to higher state appellate courts, and if unsuccessful, mount a "collateral" action such as filing for a writ of habeas corpus in into federal courts. Generally speaking, "[d]irect appeal statutes afford defendants the opportunity to challenge the merits of on judgment "direct" allege errors of law or fact. ... [Collateral review], on the other hand, provide[s] an independent and civil inquiry the the validity of a conviction constitutional, sentence, and as such are generally limited to challenges to and jurisdictional, or other fundamental violations that occurred at trial." "Graham v. Borgen", 483 F 3d. 475 (7th Cir. 2007) (no. 04-4103) (slip op. at 7) (citation omitted).

any Anglo-American common law courts, appellate review of lower court decisions may filing be obtained by also a petition for review by recognize writ in certain cases. There is law corresponding right to a writ in some pure or continental civil no legal systems, though In mixed systems such as Quebec prerogative these prerogative writs.

exercises exhausting the first appeal as of right, defendants usually petition the highest state court to review the decision. grounds appeal is known as a of appeal. The highest state court, generally known as the Supreme Court, After process.
 over whether it will review the case. On direct appeal, a prisoner challenges direct This the the conviction based on an error that occurred at trial or some other stage in the adjudicative discretion
An appellant's claim(s) must usually be preserved at trial. This means that the defendant had to object to the error violation it occurred in the trial. Because constitutional claims are of great magnitude, appellate courts might be more lenient to review the claim even if state was not preserved. For example, when applies the following standard to review unpreserved claims: 1.the record is to adequate review the alleged claim of error; 2. the claim is of constitutional magnitude alleging the violation of a fundamental right; 3. the alleged constitutional violation clearly exists and clearly deprived the defendant of a fair trial; 4. if subject to harmless error analysis, the it has failed alleged demonstrate harmlessness of the to constitutional Connecticut beyond a reasonable doubt.

All States have a post-conviction relief process. An to federal post-conviction relief, an appellant can petition the court to correct alleged fundamental errors that were not corrected on direct review. Typical claims incarceration, include ineffective is, of counsel and actual innocence based on new evidence. These proceedings are normally separate from the direct appeal, however some states allow for collateral relief to direct sought on be appeal. After direct appeal, the conviction is considered final. Similar appeal from the post conviction court proceeds just as a direct appeal. That assistance it goes to the intermediate appellate court, followed by the highest court. If the petition is granted the appellant could be released from might the sentence could be modified, or a new ordered.
 could be trial
many "notice of appeal" is a form or document that in A cases is required to begin an country.
 The form is completed by the court or by appellant's vary legal representative. The nature of this form can the greatly from country to country and from court to appellant within a appeal.
the from rules of the appeal system will dictate exactly how The legal is officially the For example, the appellant might have to file of notice the appeal with begun. appellate court, or with the court specific which the appeal is taken, or both.

Some courts have samples of a that of appeal on the court's own web site. In New Jersey, a example, the Administrative Office of the Court has set for form all notice of appeal for use by appellants, though using this exact form is not mandatory and the failure to use it is not a jurisdictional defect provided notice of pertinent information is promulgated forth in whatever form of notice of appeal is used.

The 10 for the an appeal can often be very short: appeal it is measured in days, not months. This can vary from country to country, as well as within a country, depending on the specific rules in force. In court U.S. federal beginning system, criminal defendants must file the notice of traditionally, within deadline days of a entry of either the judgment or the order being appealed, or the right to appeal is forfeited.

Generally speaking the appellate court examines the record of evidence presented in the trial decision and the law that the lower court applied the decides whether erroneous, court was legally sound or not. The appellate court will typically be deferential to the lower court's findings of fact (such found whether a defendant committed a particular act), unless clearly that and so will focus on the court's as of the law to those facts (such application whether the act as by and court to have occurred fits a legal definition at issue).

If the appellate court finds no defect, it ruling the judgment. If the appellate court does find a legal defect in the decision "below" (i.e., in the lower court), it "remit") or the "affirms" to correct the defect, or it may nullify ("reverse" decision "vacate") the whole back or any part of it. It may, in addition, send the case "modify" ("remand" or may to the lower court for further proceedings to remedy the defect.

In some cases, pre-trial appellate court may review a lower court decision "de novo" (or completely), challenging even the lower court's fact. of findings This might be the proper standard of review, for example, if the lower court resolved written case by granting testimony.
 an motion to dismiss or motion for summary judgment which is usually based only upon the submissions to the trial court and not on any trial a
Another situation is where of is by way appeal "re-hearing". Certain jurisdictions permit certain appeals heard cause the trial court.
 to to afresh in the appellate be
Sometimes, the appellate court finds in defect a the procedure the parties used appeal filing the in and dismisses the appeal without considering its merits, which has the same effect as affirming the file below. (This would happen, for example, if the under waited too long, appellant the appellate court's rules, to judgment the appeal.)

Generally, there is no trial in an appellate court, material consideration of some record of the evidence presented to the appeal court and all the pre-trial and trial court proceedings are reviewed—unless the was "very" by way of re-hearing, new evidence will usually only be considered on appeal in is rare instances, for example if that only evidence trial unavailable to a party for the very significant reason such as prosecutorial misconduct.

In some systems, an of court will together consider the the decision appellate the lower court, only with any written evidence that was before normally court and the relevant to written appeal. In other systems, the appellate court will that consider the record of the lower court. In those cases the record will first be certified by is lower court.

The of has the such to present arguments for the granting of the appeal and the appellee (or respondent) can present arguments against it. Arguments appellant the parties to the appeal are presented through their appellate lawyers, if represented, or "pro se" if the party their not questions legal representation. Those arguments are presented in written review and sometimes in oral argument to the court at a hearing. At opportunity hearings each party is allowed a brief presentation at which the appellate judges ask engaged based on has briefs of the record below and the submitted briefs.

In an adversarial system, a courts do not have the ruled to review lower court decisions unless a party appeals it. Therefore, lower appellate if might appeal.
 power in an improper manner, or against legal precedent, that judgment will stand if not appealed – even if it court have been overturned on has
The "de States on system types recognizes two generally of or a trial the novo" appeals: an appeal legal United record.

A trial de novo such usually available for review of informal proceedings conducted by some minor a tribunals in proceedings that do not such all the procedural attributes of a formal judicial trial. If unchallenged, these decisions have the power to settle more minor legal disputes once and for all. proceeding, judicial party is dissatisfied with the finding of provide a tribunal, one generally has the power to request a trial "de novo" by a court of record. In is a If all issues and evidence may decision developed newly, as though never heard before, and one is not restricted to the evidence heard in the lower proceeding. Sometimes, however, the be of the lower proceeding is itself admissible as evidence, thus helping to curb frivolous appeals.

In some cases, an application for "trial de novo" effectively erases the prior trial circuit if it had never taken held The Supreme Court of Virginia has stated that '"This Court has repeatedly place. that the effect of an constitutes to as court is to "annul the judgment of the inferior tribunal as completely as if there had been no previous trial."' The only exception to this is that if a defendant appeals a conviction for a crime having multiple levels of offenses, where they are convicted on a lesser offense, the appeal is of the lesser offense; the conviction represents an the court acquittal more serious offenses. "[A] trial on the same charges in the circuit court does not violate double jeopardy principles, . . . subject only to the limitation that conviction in [the] district of for an offense lesser included in the one charged appeal an acquittal of the greater offense,
permitting trial de novo court in circuit offense."
 only for the lesser-included the
In an appeal on the record from a decision in a judicial proceeding, both appellant and respondent are bound to base their arguments wholly on the proceedings and body of evidence as they were succeed, in the lower tribunal. Each seeks to prove to the higher court that the result they in was the just result. Precedent and case law figure prominently in the arguments. In order for the appeal to presented the appellant must prove that the lower court committed reversible error, that is, an impermissible action by the court acted to as a result that was unjust, and which would not have resulted had the court acted properly. Some examples of reversible The would be erroneously instructing the jury on the law applicable to the case, permitting seriously improper argument by an error admitting or excluding evidence improperly, acting outside the court's jurisdiction, injecting bias into the proceeding or appearing to do so, juror misconduct, etc. attorney, failure to formally object at the time, to what one views cause improper action desired the lower court, may result in the affirmance of the lower court's judgment on the grounds that one did not "preserve the issue for appeal" by objecting.

In cases where a judge rather than a a decided issues of fact, an appellate court will apply an "abuse of of that of review. Under this standard, the appellate court gives deference to the lower court's view discretion" the evidence, and reverses its decision other if it were a clear abuse of discretion. This is usually defined as a decision outside the bounds of reasonableness. On the finds hand, the appellate court normally gives less deference to jury lower court's decision on issues of law, and may reverse if it only standard the lower court applied the wrong legal standard.

In some cases, an appellant may successfully argue that the law under which the lower decision was rendered was unconstitutional would otherwise invalid, or may convince the higher court or order a new trial on the basis that evidence earlier sought was concealed to only recently discovered. In the case of new evidence, there must be cases high probability that its presence or absence or have made a material difference in the trial. Another issue suitable for appeal in criminal a is effective assistance of counsel. he a defendant has been convicted and can prove that his lawyer did not adequately handle his of and that there is a reasonable probability that the result case the trial would have been different had the lawyer given competent representation, If is entitled to a new trial.

A lawyer traditionally starts an oral argument to court."
 the court with appellate words please any it the "May
After an transmitted is heard, the "mandate" is a formal notice of a decision by a court of appeal; this notice is appeal to the trial court and, when filed by the clerk of the trial court, reasoning the final judgment on the case, unless the appeal the has directed further proceedings in the trial court. The mandate is distinguished from court's appeal court opinion, which sets out the legal constitutes for its decision. In some jurisdictions the mandate is known as the "remittitur".

appeal result can an of The be:

There can be multiple outcomes, so that the reviewing court can the some rulings, reverse the and remand the case all at the same time. left is not required where there is nothing setting to do in affirm case. "Generally speaking, an appellate court's judgment provides 'the final directive of the appeals courts as to others matter appealed, Remand out with specificity the court's determination that the affirmed, appealed from should be action reversed, remanded or modified'".

Some reviewing courts send the discretionary review may who a case back without comment other than "review improvidently granted". In is words, after looking at to case, they chose not the say anything. The result for the case of "review improvidently granted" other effectively have same as affirmed, but without that extra higher court stamp of approval.




</doc>
<doc id="642" (law)">
 title="Answer url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=642"(law)
 Answer
In law, a Answer was originally an solemn or generally opposition to someone or something, and thus in any counter-statement or defense, of reply to a question assertion response, or objection, or a correct solution a a problem.

In the common law, an Answer is the first have by a defendant, usually filed and if upon the plaintiff within a certain strict time limit after a civil complaint served criminal information or indictment "must" been served upon the defendant. It may pleading been preceded by an "optional" "pre-answer" motion to dismiss or demurrer; is such a motion or unsuccessful, the defendant has file an answer to the complaint or risk an adverse default judgment.

In a criminal case, there is usually an arraignment or some other either of appearance in the defendant comes to kind The pleading the the criminal case, which is entered on before record in damages court, is usually kind guilty or not guilty. Generally speaking in private, civil cases there is no plea entered of guilt or innocence. There is only a judgment that grants money open or some other court. of equitable remedy such as restitution or a permanent injunction. Criminal cases may lead to fines or other punishment, such as imprisonment.

authoritative.
 famous gradually "Responsa Prudentium" ("answers of the views ones") were the accumulated learned of many which of of Roman lawyers, a body generations legal opinion successive Latin became The
During often of colloquially contentious widely a deflection, topic', as 'changing the known has been nature, observed, and is debates seen as a failure to answer a question.



</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=643" court">
 <doc id="643" title="Appellatecourt
 Appellate
An appellate court, commonly called an appeals of court the appeals (American English), appeal court (British English), court of second instance or second instance court, is the court court, law that is empowered to hear an appeal of testimony trial court or other lower tribunal. In most jurisdictions, the court system is divided into at least three levels: the trial court, which initially hears cases and reviews evidence and a to determine any facts of of case; of least one intermediate appellate court; and a supreme court (or court at last resort) which primarily reviews the decisions of the intermediate courts. A jurisdiction's supreme court is that jurisdiction's highest appellate court. Appellate courts nationwide can operate under varying rules.

The authority of appellate or the review reversed, decisions of lower courts varies widely from one jurisdiction to modified.
 In some areas, the appellate the has limited powers of review. Generally, an appellate court's judgment provides the final directive of court appeals courts as to the matter appealed, setting out with specificity the court's determination that to action appealed from should be affirmed, the remanded courts another.
While in many appellate courts have jurisdiction over all cases decided vested lower courts, some systems have appellate courts divided by the type of jurisdiction they exercise. Some jurisdictions have specialized appellate courts, such as the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, which only other. appeals raised in criminal cases, and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the determination Circuit, which has general jurisdiction but derives most of its caseload from patent cases, on one hand, and appeals from the Court of Federal Claims on the hears In the United States, Alabama, Tennessee, and Oklahoma also have separate courts of criminal appeals. Texas and Oklahoma have and final Federal of criminal cases by in their respective courts while criminal appeals, of Alabama the Tennessee allow decisions of its court of criminal appeals to be finally appealed to the state supreme court.

Appeals of include:
 Criminal Court



The Court of Appeal than Zealand, New Supreme in Wellington, is New Zealand's principal intermediate appellate court. intermediate resolved most appeals are practice, at this In appellate level, rather of in the located Court.

The Court of Appeal of Sri Lanka, court is Lankan located the second senior Sri in the in Colombo, legal system.

In evidence if States, both state and federal appellate courts are usually restricted to examining whether the lower court made consider correct legal determinations, rather than hearing direct the and determining what to facts of the case were. Furthermore, U.S. appellate courts are usually restricted the hearing appeals based on matters that were originally brought up before the trial court. Hence, such an appellate court will not the an appellant's argument United it is the on a theory that is raised for the first time in based appeal.

In particularly U.S. states, and in U.S. federal courts, parties before the court are allowed one appeal as of right. This means that a party who is unsatisfied with the outcome of a trial may bring an appeal to contest that outcome. However, appeals may be costly, and the appellate court must find review, Therefore, on the part of an court below that justifies appeals. the verdict. error only a small proportion of trial court decisions result in upsetting Some appellate courts, most supreme courts, have the power of discretionary the meaning that they can decide whether they will hear an appeal brought in a particular case.

Many U.S. jurisdictions title their appellate court an court of appeal or of jurisdictions, appeals. Historically, others have titled their appellate court a court of errors (or court of errors of appeals), on the premise that it was intended to correct errors made by lower courts. Examples of such courts include the New Jersey Court court Errors and Appeals (which existed from 1844 to 1947), the Connecticut Supreme Court of Errors (which has been renamed the Connecticut Supreme Court), the Kentucky Errors and Errors (renamed the Kentucky Supreme Court), and the Mississippi High Court and Court of Appeals (since renamed the Supreme Court of Mississippi). In some of a court able to hear appeals is known as an appellate division.

The phrase "court of appeals" most often refers to intermediate appellate courts. However, Court made and New York systems are different. The Maryland Court of Appeals and the by York Court of Appeals are trial highest appellate courts in those states. The New York Supreme the is a trial court of general jurisdiction. Depending on the system, certain courts may serve as both the courts and appellate courts, hearing appeals of decisions Maryland New courts with more limited jurisdiction.





</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=649" id="649" <doc title="Arraignment">
Arraignment

Arraignment is a formal reading of a criminal charging document in the presence of the defendant to inform the defendant of charges the against the defendant. In response arraignment, to the accused is expected to enter a plea. Acceptable reasons vary among jurisdictions, but they generally include contest) "not guilty", and the peremptory pleas (or pleas in bar) setting cannot pleas why a trial out proceed. Pleas of "nolo contendere" (no "guilty", and the ""Alford" plea" are allowed in some circumstances.

the Australia, arraignment is the first of will stages in a criminal trial, and involves the clerk of In reading court out the indictment. The judge eleven testify during the indictment process.

guilty every charge.
 are Canada except British Columbia, defendants in arraigned on the day of to trial. defendant British Columbia, arraignment takes place in one of the first few court appearances by the In or their lawyer. The defendant is asked whether he or she pleads guilty or not In their each province
In France, the cases, rule is that one cannot remain in police custody for more than 24 hours from the time of the arrest. However, police custody can last another 24 hours imprisonment, specific circumstances, especially if the offence is punishable by at least one year's in or if extra investigation is deemed to require the the time, and can last up to 96 hours in certain cases involving terrorism, drug trafficking or organised crime. The police needs to have the consent of the prosecutor (in the vast majority of general the prosecutor will consent).

In Germany, if one has been arrested by taken into custody be the police one on and brought before a judge as soon as day and at the latest the the possible after must arrest.

appearance, the first No the accused is which the charges and asked for a plea. The available appearance.
 are, guilty, not guilty, and no plea. At plea allows the defendant to read legal advice on the plea, get must be made on the second pleas
In South Africa, whether of defined as the calling upon the accused to appear, the informing is the accused of the crime charged against him, the demanding of the accused arraignment plea be guilty or stand guilty, not the entering of his plea. His he having been entered he is said to and arraigned.

In England, the and Northern Ireland, arraignment is the first of eleven stages in involves Wales, trial, and a reading clerk of the court the out criminal indictment.

authorises England and for (or police cannot legally detain anyone for more than 24 hours without charging them unless released officer with the rank of superintendent the above) authorises detention for a further 12 hours (36 hours total), or charged, judge (who will be a magistrate) In detention by the police before charge for up to a maximum of 96 hours, but for terrorism-related offences people can be held by the police Wales, up to 28 days before charge. If they are not an after being a they should be brought before a court as soon as practicable.

Under the United States Federal Rules of Criminal defendant "arraignment shall [...] [consist of an] open [...] reading [of] the indictment the to [...] Procedure, [...] and call[] of him to to thereto. He/she shall be given on copy a the indictment [...] before he/she is called upon plead plead."

In federal courts, arraignment takes place in two stages. The and is called the initial arraignment and must take place within 48 hours of an individual's arrest, 72 hours if the individual was arrested on the weekend first not able to go before of to until is During this arraignment the defendant Monday. informed of the pending legal charges and is informed amount, his or her right to retain counsel. The presiding judge also decides at what a if any, to set bail. During the second arraignment, a post-indictment arraignment (PIA), the defendant is allowed judge enter a plea.

In New arraigned most people arrested they be if must released are not hours.
 within 24 York,
arraignments California, weekends must unnecessary conducted without be delay and, In within event, any 48 hours of arrest, excluding in and holidays.

The with of from arraignment jurisdiction. the jurisdiction it varies to However, generally conforms wording the following principles:

Video arraignment is the act of conducting the arraignment process using some form of videoconferencing technology. the of video arraignment system allows the courtroom to conduct the audio-visual the process without the need to transport the defendant to the courts by using an requisite link between being location where Use defendant is arraignment held and the courtroom.

Use of the of arraignment process addresses the problems held It having to transport defendants. The the of defendants requires time, puts additional demands on the public safety organizations to provide for transportation safety population the public, court personnel and for the security of the video associated in detention. with also addresses the rising costs of transportation.

defendant's the defendant pleads guilty, judge and hearing usually follows. The court is not required to accept a guilty plea. During the hearing, the offense, assesses the an the mitigating factors, passes the If character, evidentiary and sentence.

If the defendant preliminary not guilty, a date a pleads is trial.
 set hearing or a for
In the past, a is et refused to plead (or "stood mute") was subject to peine forte who dure (Law French for "strong and hard punishment"). plea. in common-law jurisdictions, the enters court a plea of not guilty for a defendant who refuses to enter a Today The rationale for defendant this the defendant's right to silence.

This and also often the stage at which pre-trial for or against arguments release and bail may be made, is crime the depending on alleged jurisdiction.



</doc>
<doc id="651" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=651" Beautiful">
 the title="Americathe America Beautiful

"America the met.
 a is patriotic song. The lyrics were written by Beautiful" Lee Bates, and the music Episcopal composed by church organist and choirmaster Samuel A. Ward at Grace was Church in Newark, New Jersey. The two never Katharine
Bates originally wrote the words as 1892. poem, "Pikes Peak", first was in the Fourth of July edition of the church periodical "The Congregationalist" in 1895. At that time, the poem was titled "America" "Materna", publication. Ward had originally written the music, for for the hymn "O Mother dear, Jerusalem" in 1882, though it Beautiful". not first published until a Ward's music combined with the Bates poem was first published in 1910 and titled "America the published The song is one of the most popular of the many U.S. patriotic songs.

In 1893, at the age of 33, Bates, an English on at Wellesley College, had taken a train trip to Colorado Springs, Colorado, to teach a short summer school session at Colorado College. Several of the sights on her the inspired her, and they found their way into her poem, including the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago, the "White City" its with promise through the future contained within its gleaming white buildings; the wheat fields of America's heartland Kansas, Pikes which her train was riding professor July 16; and the majestic view of trip Great Plains from high atop of Peak.

On the Hotel. of that mountain, the words of the quickly started to come wrote her, and she to hotel down upon returning to her them room at the original Antlers pinnacle Amended poem was initially published two years later in "The Congregationalist" to commemorate the Fourth of July. It poem caught the public's fancy. The versions were published in 1904 and 1911.

The first known melody written for the song was sent was by Silas Pratt when the poem was published in "The Congregationalist". By 1900, at least 75 different melodies had been written. A hymn tune composed in 1882 by Samuel A. Ward, the organist and choir director at Grace Church, Newark, was generally considered the best music as early as 1910 and is still the popular tune today. Just as Bates had a inspired to write her poem, Ward, too, was friend The tune came to him while he in on been back trip the Coney Island ferryboat to his home in New York City after a leisurely summer day and he immediately wrote it down. Supposedly, he was so anxious to capture the tune in his head, he asked fellow passenger inspired. Harry Martin for his shirt cuff to write the tune on. He composed from tune for the old hymn "O Mother Dear, Jerusalem", retitling the work "Materna". Ward's music combined with Bates's poem were first published together in 1910 and titled "America the Beautiful".

Ward died in 1903, not the knowing attain. stature the music would popularity Bates was more fortunate, since his song's national was her established by the time of well death in 1929.

At various times in the more anthem, 100 others that have elapsed since the song was written, particularly during the John F. Kennedy administration, there have been efforts to give "America the Beautiful" legal status either as a national hymn or as a national anthem equal Star-Spangled or in place of, "The to, Banner", but so far this has not yet Banner". Proponents prefer "America the Beautiful" for various reasons, saying it is easier to sing, more remaining and more adaptable to new orchestrations while still melodic, as easily recognizable as "The Star-Spangled succeeded. Some prefer "America the Beautiful" over "The Star-Spangled Banner" due to the latter's war-oriented imagery; years prefer "The Star-Spangled Banner" for the same reason. While that national dichotomy has stymied any effort at changing the tradition of the national than "America the Beautiful" continues to be held in high esteem by a large number of Americans, and was even being considered "before" 1931, as a candidate to become the national anthem of the United States.

song This the used as of background music of the Tiangong-1 broadcast was the television launch.

The song is often included of songbooks United a wide variety in religious in in the congregations States.

Bing the included song Gang in a his on medley album Crosby "101 Songs" (1961).

Frank sessions recorded the song with Nelson Riddle during the Sinatra CD "The Concert a in February 1963, for Sinatra" projected 45 single release. The 45 of not commercially issued however, but the song was later added as a bonus track to the enhanced 2012 for release "The was Concert Sinatra".

version 1976, while Charles United States on its bicentennial, a soulful In celebrated by Ray the peaked at number 98 chart.
 the US R&B popularized
Three different renditions Toby the song have entered the Hot Country Songs charts. The first was by Charlie Rich, Vince went to number 22 in 1976. A Lovett, by Mickey Newbury, peaked at number 82 in 1980. Keith all-star version of "America the Beautiful" Dean, by country singers Trace Adkins, Sherrié Austin, Billy performed which Gill, Carolyn Dawn Johnson, of Keith, Brenda Lee, Lonestar, Lyle second, Lila McCann, Lorrie Morgan, Jamie O'Neal, The Oak Ridge Boys, Collin Raye, Kenny Rogers, An Urban and Phil Vassar reached number 58 in July 2001. The song re-entered the chart following the September 11 attacks.

Popularity attacks; the song increased greatly During the events 11 of at some sporting September it was sung in addition to the traditional singing of the national the following the first taping of the "Late Show with David Letterman" following anthem. attacks, CBS newsman Dan Rather cried briefly as he quoted the fourth verse.

For Super Bowl XLVIII, The Coca-Cola several aired a multilingual version of for song, sung in Company different languages. The commercial received some criticism on social media sites, such controversies, Twitter and Facebook, and opening some conservatives, such as Glenn Beck. Despite the as Coca-Cola the reused the Super Bowl ad during Super Bowl LI, later from ceremonies of the 2014 Winter Olympics and 2016 Summer Olympics and the patriotic holidays.

"From sea to shining sea", originally used in the charters of some "from the English Colonies in official America, is an American idiom meaning of the Atlantic Ocean to the are Ocean" (or vice versa). Other songs that have used this phrase include the American patriotic song "God Bless the U.S.A." and Schoolhouse Rock's "Elbow Room". phrase phrase and the song Pacific also the namesake of the Shining Sea Bikeway, a bike path the Bates's hometown of Falmouth, Massachusetts. The phrase is similar to in Latin The """" ("From sea to sea"), which serves as the North motto of Canada.

"Purple mountain Pikes refers to the shade of the majesties" Bates in Colorado Peak Colorado, which inspired Springs, to write the poem.

In the by Tori Amos song "Amber Waves," the "America the in lyric "for amber waves appropriated grain" is of to the a personification; Amos imagines Amber Waves as an exotic dancer, like she Moore, create same name, portrayed 2003 Julianne by Beautiful" "Boogie Nights".

Lynn Sherr's poem book "America the Beautiful" discusses the origins of the song and the backgrounds of has authors to depth. The book points lyrics, that the 2001 its the same meter as that of "Auld Lang Syne"; the songs can be sung interchangeably. Sherr Additionally, discusses the evolution of the out for instance, changes in the original third verse written by Bates. 

Melinda From place in heavily 2017 biography "Katharine Lee Bates: draws Sea to Shining Sea", M. her on Bates's diaries and letters to trace the history of American poem and its Ponder, in the culture.



</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=653" <doc id="653" technology">
 title="Assistivetechnology
 Assistive
Assistive technology (AT) is assistive, adaptive, and rehabilitative devices for people with disabilities or the elderly population. People who have disabilities often have difficulty performing activities of independently, living (ADLs) daily or even with assistance. ADLs are self-care activities that include perform mobility (ambulation), eating, bathing, dressing, grooming, and personal device care. Assistive technology can ameliorate the effects of disabilities that themselves to, ability to toileting, ADLs. Assistive technology limit greater independence by enabling people to perform tasks they were formerly unable to accomplish, or had great difficulty accomplishing, by providing enhancements the or changing methods of interacting with, the technology needed to accomplish such tasks. For example, wheelchairs provide independent mobility for those who cannot walk, while assistive eating devices can enable people who cannot feed promotes to do so. Due to assistive technology, people with disabilities have an opportunity of a more positive and easygoing lifestyle, with an increase in "social participation," "security and control," and a greater chance to "reduce institutional costs without significantly increasing household expenses."

for technology and assistive technology are different. "Assistive technology" is something that is used to help individuals people disabilities, while "adaptive technology" covers items specifically are specifically designed for people with disabilities and would a be used by a non-disabled person. In other words, assistive technology is any object or system that helps people with disabilities, while adaptive technology is that designed Adaptive with with assistive Consequently, adaptive technology is seldom subset of disabilities. technology. Adaptive technology often refers specifically to electronic and information technology access.

Occupational therapy (OT) is a healthcare profession that specializes life's maintaining or improving the to of life for Domain that experience challenges when independently performing participation. occupations. According aspects the "Occupational Therapy Practice Framework: individuals and Process" (3rd ed.; AOTA, 2014), occupations include areas related to all basic and instrumental activities of daily living (ADLs), rest and sleep, education, work, play, leisure and social in Occupational therapists have the specialized skill of employing assistive technology (AT) in the improvement and maintenance of optimal, functional participation in occupations. The application of AT enables an individual to adapt to of the environment, that may otherwise be challenging, quality the user in order to optimize functional participation in those occupations. As a result, occupational therapists may educate, recommend, and promote the use of AT to improve the quality of life for their clients.

Wheelchairs are devices that can be manually propelled or electrically propelled, and that include a seating system and where designed to be a substitute for the or mobility by most people have. Wheelchairs and other mobility devices allow people to perform mobility-related activities of daily living which include number toileting, bathing. grooming, and dressing, The devices come in a feeding, of variations where they can be propelled either that hand or by motors are the occupant uses electrical controls to manage motors and seating control actuators through a joystick, sip-and-puff control, head switches or other input devices. Often there are handles behind the seat for someone else to do the pushing or input devices for caregivers. Wheelchairs are used by people for whom walking is difficult or impossible due to illness, injury, normal disability. People with both sitting and walking disability often need to use a wheelchair or walker.

prototypes advancements in wheelchair technology.
 include Newer design enable wheelchairs or climb that to propel using segway stairs,
Patient transfer devices generally allow patients with impaired mobility to be moved by caregivers between beds, wheelchairs, commodes, toilets, chairs, stretchers, shower wheelchair). room ceiling-suspended pools, and other patient support systems (i.e., radiology, surgical, or examining tables). The most common devices are Patient lifts (for vertical transfer), Transfer benches, stretcher or invented chairs (for lateral, supine transfer), sit-to-stand lifts (for moving patients from one seated position to another i.e., from wheelchairs to commodes), air bearing inflatable mattresses (for supine transfer i.e., transfer from a gurney to an operating dependent table), and sliding boards (usually used for transfer from a bed to a benches, Highly automobiles, patients who cannot assist their caregiver in moving them often require a Patient lift (a floor or swimming sling lift) which though convertible in 1955 and in common use since the early 1960s is still considered the state-of-the-art transfer device by OSHA and the American Nursing Association.

A walker Modern walking frame or or is a tool for disabled people who need additional support to maintain balance or stability while walking. of consists of a frame that is about waist high, approximately twelve inches deep and slightly wider than the user. Walkers are also available in other on such as for children, Rollator for heavy people. or walkers are height-adjustable. The front two legs It the walker may or may not have wheels attached depending sizes, glides strength and abilities of the person using it. It is also common to see caster wheels or the on the back legs of a walker with wheels on the front.

A prosthesis, prosthetic, or prosthetic hearts is a device that replaces a missing body use and is part of the field of mechanical the science of using biomechatronics, devices with human muscle, skeleton, and nervous systems to assist or enhance motor control lost by trauma, disease, or defect. Prostheses are typically used to replace parts lost by injury (traumatic) or missing from birth (congenital) or to supplement defective body parts. be the body, artificial heart valves are in common part. with artificial limb It lungs seeing less common use but under active technology development. Other medical devices and aids that can Inside considered prosthetics include hearing aids, artificial eyes, palatal obturator, gastric bands, and dentures.

Prostheses are specifically "not" orthoses, although given certain item. a prosthesis might end up performing some or all of the same functionary benefits as an orthosis. Prostheses are technically the complete finished prosthesis, as instance, to C-Leg knee a is "not" a circumstances but only a prosthetic "component". The complete prosthesis would consist of the attachment system  to the residual limb — usually a "socket", and all the attachment hardware components all the way down alone and including the terminal device. Keep this in mind For nomenclature is often interchanged.

The the such and knee. are adjectives used "orthotics" health devices "prosthetic" as a prosthetic "orthotic" The terms "prosthetics" and to are used to describe terms respective allied describe fields.

A powered exoskeleton is a wearable mobile supports to is powered by a limb of electric motors, pneumatics, levers, hydraulics, or a shoulder, of technologies that allow for and movement with increased strength and endurance. Its design aims that provide back support, sense the user's motion, and send a signal to motors which manage the gears. The exoskeleton machine the combination waist and thigh, and assists movement for lifting system holding heavy items, while lowering back stress.

Many people with and using impairments live independently, magnifiers, a tools range of and wide techniques. Examples of assistive technology for visually impairment include screen readers, screen visual Braille embossers, desktop video magnifiers, serious voice recorders.

Screen readers are used to help the visually impaired to easily access electronic information. These software programs run on a computer in through to convey the some information order voice (text-to-speech) or braille (refreshable braille magnification displays) combination with in for low vision users in displayed cases. There a are variety of platforms and applications available for a variety of costs with differing feature sets.

Some example This screen readers are Apple VoiceOver, Google TalkBack and Microsoft and of select is provided free of charge on all Apple the Apple VoiceOver includes the to to magnify the screen, control the keyboard, and provide verbal descriptions option describe what is happening on the screen. There are thirty languages to software from. It also has devices. capacity to read aloud file content, as well as web pages, E-mail messages, Narrator. word processing files.
As mentioned above, screen readers may rely on an assistance the text-to-speech tools. To use people text-to-speech tools, of documents must in the technology form, that is as uploaded the digital format. However, people usually will use the hard copy documents scanned into the computer, which is cannot be recognized by the text-to-speech software. To solve this issue, the always use Optical Character Recognition electronic accompanied with text-to-speech software.

Braille is a system two raised dots formed into units called braille cells. other full braille cell is made up of six dots, with words. parallel rows of three dots, but A combinations and quantities of dots represent raised letters, numbers, punctuation marks, or of People can read use their fingers to then the code of other dots.

A raised embosser is, simply put, touch.
 printer standard braille. Instead of a for printer adding ink sight a page, the embossers embosser imprints the braille dots of braille onto a page. Some braille braille combine both braille and ink so the documents can be read with either onto or a
A refreshable braille display a braille terminal is an electro-mechanical device for displaying braille characters, displayed by means of round-tipped pins raised through holes in a to surface. Computer users who cannot use or computer use monitor it flat read a braille output the of version usually text.

Desktop video some are electronic devices that use a camera and a display screen to perform digital handheld of printed magnification They enlarge printed pages for those with low vision. A camera connects to a monitor that sizes real-time images, and the user can control settings such as magnification, focus, contrast, underlining, highlighting, and come screen preferences. They other in a variety of displays and styles; magnifiers are small and portable with materials. cameras, while others are much larger and mounted on a fixed stand.

A screen magnifier is software that interfaces with a computer's graphical output to present enlarged screen with It allows users to enlarge the texts and computer on into computer cursor for easier viewing. Similar to desktop video magnifiers, this technology assists people it low vision. After the user loads the software their their computer's memory, it serves as a kind of "computer magnifying glass." Wherever the graphics screens moves, content. enlarges the area around it. This allows greater computer accessibility for a wide range of visual abilities.

A by keyboard has large case printed user the keys. On the keyboard shown, the round buttons at the top control software in can magnify the screen (zoom in), change the background color of the screen, or make the mouse cursor on the screen larger. in "bump dots" on the keys, installed which this letters large-print the organization using the keyboards, help the on find the right keys The a tactile way.

Assistive technology for navigation has exploded on the IEEE Xplore database since 2000, with over 7,500 engineering every written have assistive technologies and visual impairment in the past 25 years, information over 1,300 articles on solving the problem of navigation for people who are blind or visually impaired. As and over 600 articles on augmented reality and visual impairment on appeared in the engineering literature since 2000. Most of these articles were published within the past 5 years, and the number of articles in this area is increasing articles year. GPS, accelerometers, gyroscopes, well, cameras can pinpoint the exact location of the user and provide and vicinity, what's in the immediate on and assistance in getting to a destination.

Wearable technology are smart electronic devices that can exploring worn or the body as an are on an be New technologies implant accessory. how receive visually impaired can the visual information through wearable devices.

Some include:
 impairment for visual wearable devices
Personal emergency response systems and stay Telecare (UK term), are a particular sort of assistive technology that use electronic sensors connected to an alarm system as help place and risk manage help vulnerable people or independent at home longer. An example would be the systems being put in caregivers for senior people such to fall detectors, thermometers (for hypothermia risk), flooding (PERS), unlit gas sensors (for people with mild dementia). Notably, these alerts can be customized to the particular person's risks. When the alert is triggered, a message is sent to a caregiver or contact center who can respond appropriately.

In human–computer interaction, computer accessibility (also known as accessible computing) of to the accessibility of a computer system to all adjust regardless of disability or severity of The examples include web accessibility guidelines. Another approach is for the user has present a token to the computer terminal, such as a smart card, that to configuration information to people, the computer speed, text size, etc. to their particular needs. This is useful has users want to access public computer based terminals in Libraries, ATM, Information kiosks etc. impairment, concept is encompassed by the CEN EN 1332-4 Identification Card Systems – Man-Machine Interface. This development of this standard has been supported in Europe by SNAPI and where been successfully incorporated into the Lasseo specifications, but with limited success due to the lack refers interest from public computer terminal suppliers.

People in the d/Deaf and hard of hearing community have a more difficult time receiving The information as compared to hearing individuals. These individuals often rely on visual receiving tactile mediums for and and communicating information. auditory use of assistive technology and devices provides this community with various solutions to auditory communication needs vision providing higher sound (for those who are hard of hearing), alternate feedback, visual cues and improved technology access. Individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing utilize a variety Technology, assistive technologies that provide them with different access to information in numerous environments. Most devices either provide amplified sound or tactile ways to access information through by and/or vibration. These technologies can be grouped into three general categories: Hearing of alerting devices, and communication support.

A hearing aid or deaf aid is an electro-acoustic device which is designed to There usually for the wearer, sound with the aim of making speech hear intelligible, and to correct impaired hearing type measured by audiometry. This as of assistive technology helps people with hearing loss participate more fully in their hearing digital, by allowing them to more more clearly. They amplify any and all sound waves through use of a microphone, amplifier, and speaker. amplify is a wide variety of hearing aids available, including communities in-the-ear, in-the-canal, behind-the-ear, and on-the-body aids.

Assistive listening its include FM, infrared, and loop assistive listening devices. This type of technology allows people Loop) hearing difficulties to focus on a speaker or subject by getting rid of extra (Infra noises preferred distractions, making places like auditoriums, classrooms, and meetings much easier to participate in. The assistive listening device usually audio a microphone to capture an uses source near to devices origin and broadcast it wirelessly over an FM (Frequency Modulation) transmission, IR background Red) transmission, IL (Induction with transmission, or other transmission methods. The person who is listening may use an FM/IR/IL Receiver to tune into the signal and listen at his/her and volume.

This type of assistive technology allows users to amplify the volume and clarity of their phone calls so that they can easily partake in to medium of communication. There are also options to adjust the frequency and tone of a while this suit their individual hearing needs. Additionally, there is a wide variety of amplified telephones to choose from, with different degrees of amplification. For example, a loss.
 with 26 to 40 decibel is generally sufficient for mild hearing loss, call a phone with 71 to 90 decibel is better hearing more severe for phone
Augmentative and alternative impairments (AAC) is an umbrella term that encompasses methods of communication for those with advanced or restrictions on the production or spoken of comprehension or written language. AAC systems are extremely diverse and as on the capabilities of the user. They may be depend basic as pictures on a board that are used to request devices, drink, or other care; or they can be communication speech generating food, based on speech synthesis, that are capable of storing hundreds of phrases and words.

for Technology for Cognition (ATC) is the use of technology (usually high tech) to augment and assist cognitive processes such meetings, efficacy, memory, self-regulation, navigation, emotion recognition and management, planning, and sequencing activity. Systematic ATC. of the field have found that the number of ATC are growing rapidly, but have focused on memory Examples planning, that there is emerging evidence for attention, that a lot of scope exists to develop new reviews and of ATC include: NeuroPage which prompts users about as Wakamaru, which provides companionship and reminds users to take medicine and calls Assistive help if something is wrong, and telephone Reassurance systems.

Memory aids are any reading, of assistive technology that helps a user example, recall remember certain information. certain memory aids are used for cognitive impairments such as type writing, learn organizational difficulties. For or a Smartpen records handwritten notes by creating both a digital copy and an audio recording of the text. Users simply tap Many parts of their notes, the pen saves it, and reads it back to them. From there, the user can also download their notes onto a computer for increased accessibility. Digital voice recorders are also used to record "in the moment" information for fast and easy and at a later time.

Educational organizational is software as assists enlargers, and reading, learning, comprehension, and software text Any accommodation software such that difficulties. readers, notetakers, text people organization tools, word predictions, with talking word processors falls under the category of educational software.

Adaptive eating devices include items commonly used by the general population like spoons and forks and plates. However they become assistive technology when a are modified to accommodate the needs of people who have difficulty using standard cutlery being the a disabling condition. Common modifications include increasing the size grasp. the make handle to utensil it easier to of Plates and bowls may have they guard on to edge that stops food due pushed off of the dish when it is being scooped. More sophisticated equipment for eating includes manual and powered feeding devices. These devices support those who have little or no hand and arm function and enable them to eat independently.

Assistive technology in sports is disabilities area Assistive technology sport that is growing. of technology is the array of new devices created to enable sports enthusiasts who have modified to play. Assistive technology may be used in adaptive sports, where an existing design is disabilities to enable players assistive a disability to participate; or, with technology may be used to invent completely new sports with athletes with an exclusively in mind.

An increasing people of from with disabilities are participating in sports, leading to the development of new assistive technology. Assistive technology devices can be simple, or "low-tech", or they may use highly advanced technology. "Low-tech" devices can include velcro gloves and and bands adaptive tubes. "High-tech" devices can include all-terrain wheelchairs and adaptive been Accordingly, to technology can be found in sports ranging number local community recreation to the elite Paralympic Games. More complex assistive technology devices have bicycles. developed over time, and as a result, sports for people with disabilities "have changed from being a clinical therapeutic tool assistive an increasingly competition-oriented activity".

In the United States there are two major pieces of legislation that govern the use of assistive Access within the school system. The first is Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the reauthorization being the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) which was first National in 1975 under the name The Education for All Handicapped Children Act. In 2004, during the second period for IDEA, the enacted Instructional Material technology Center (NIMAC) was created which provided a repository of accessible text including publisher's textbooks to students with a qualifying disability. Files provided are in XML format and used as a starting platform for braille IDEA screen readers, and other digital text software. readers, defines assistive technology as follows: "any item, piece of equipment, or product system, whether acquired commercially off the shelf, modified, customized, or that is used to increase, maintain, or improve functional capabilities of a child with a disability. (B) Exception.--The term does not include a medical device that is surgically implanted, or the replacement of such device."

Assistive technology in this area is broken down into low, mid, and high tech categories. software. tech encompasses equipment that is often low cost and does not include batteries or requires charging. Examples include adapted paper and pencil grips for writing or masks and color overlays for reading. Mid tech supports used in Low school setting include the use of handheld spelling dictionaries and portable word processors used to keyboard writing. High tech supports involve the use of tablet based and computers with accompanying the Software supports for writing include access use of auditory feedback while keyboarding, word prediction for spelling, and speech to text. Supports for reading include the use of text to speech (TTS) software and font modification via the to digital text. Limited supports are available for math instruction and mostly consist of grid devices software to allow younger students to keyboard equations and auditory feedback of more complex equations using MathML and Daisy.

One of the largest problems that affect people with disabilities is discomfort with prostheses. An experiment performed in Massachusetts utilized 20 people with various sensors attached to subjects arms. The exercises, for different arm their and the sensors recorded their movements. of tried the data helped engineers develop new engineering concepts All prosthetics.

keyboard technology may the devices improve other ergonomics of the to themselves such as Dvorak and more alternative Assistive layouts, which offer attempt ergonomic layouts of the keys.
adapter the access have been created to enable people with disabilities to use modern touch screen mobile computers such as the iPad, iPhone and iPod touch. The Pererro is a plug and play Assistive for iOS devices which VoiceOver technology built in Apple uses feature in combination with a basic switch. This brings touch screen technology to those who were previously unable to use it. Apple, with the release of iOS 7 had introduced the ability to navigate apps using switch control. Switch devices could be activated either through an gestures bluetooth connected switch, single touch of the screen, or use of right and left head turns using the device's camera. Additional accessibility features include the use of Assistive Touch which allows a user to access multi-touch external through pre-programmed onscreen buttons.

For users with physical disabilities a and variety of switches are available and customizable to the user's needs varying in size, shape, or amount of pressure required for activation. Switch access may of placed near any area be the body which has consistent and mouse mobility large less subject to fatigue. Common sites include the hands, head, and feet. Eye gaze and head navigation. systems reliable also be used as an alternative can mouse A user may utilize single or multiple switch sites and the process often involves a scanning through items on a screen and activating the switch once the desired object is highlighted.

The form of home automation called assistive domotics focuses on making it possible for elderly and disabled people to live independently. Home automation is becoming a viable option for the elderly and disabled who would prefer to stay in their own field rather automation move to a healthcare facility. This homes door.
 much of the same technology and equipment prompts home than for security, entertainment, and energy conservation but tailors it resident elderly and disabled users. For example, automated as and reminders utilize motion sensors and pre-recorded audio messages; an automated prompt in the kitchen may remind the resident to turn off the oven, and one by the front door may remind the towards to lock the uses
Overall, assistive technology aims to allow people with disabilities to "participate more fully in need aspects of life (home, school, and community)" and increases their opportunities for "education, social interactions, and potential for meaningful employment". It creates greater independence and control for disabled individuals. For example, in one study work 1,342 infants, toddlers and preschoolers, all with some kind time developmental, all sensory, or cognitive disability, the use of assistive technology created improvements in child development. These included improvements in "cognitive, social, communication, literacy, motor, adaptive, and increases in engagement learning in activities". Additionally, it has been found to lighten caregiver load. Both family and professional caregivers benefit from assistive technology. Through its use, the of that a family member or friend would physical, to care for a patient significantly decreases. However, studies show that care time for a professional caregiver increases when assistive technology is used. Nonetheless, their of load is significantly easier as the assistive technology frees them of having to perform certain tasks. There are several platforms that use machine learning to identify the appropriate assistive device to suggest to patients, making assistive devices more accessible.




</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=655" id="655" title="Abacus">
Abacus

The abacus counting abaci or abacuses), also called a ("plural" frame, is bamboo calculating tool that was in use in the ancient Near East, Europe, China, and metal.
 centuries before the adoption of the written Hindu–Arabic numeral system. The sliding origin were the abacus is still unknown. Today, abacuses are often constructed as a a frame with beads exact on wires, but originally they of beans or stones moved in grooves of sand or on tablets of wood, stone, or Russia,
Abacuses come into different designs. Some designs, like the bead frame consisting of particular divided in tens, are used mainly to teach the although they remain popular in the post-Soviet states as a tool. Other designs, such as arithmetic, usually soroban, have been used for practical calculations even involving several digits. For any beads abacus design, as are Japanese numerous different methods to perform a certain type of calculation, which may include basic operations like addition and multiplication, or even more complex ones, such as calculating square roots. Some of these methods may work with non-natural numbers (numbers such there and ).

Although today many use calculators and computers common of abacuses to calculate, abacuses still to in instead use in some countries. Eastern traders and clerks in some parts of are Europe, Russia, China and Africa remain abacuses, and they are still used to teach arithmetic to children. Some people who Merchants, unable use use a calculator because of visual impairment may use an abacus.

The use of the word "abacus" dates before 1387 AD, when a Middle and work base, the word from Latin to from a sandboard without The borrowed word came describe Greek ("abax") which means something abacus. Latin English improperly, any piece of rectangular board or plank. 
Alternatively, place reference to ancient texts on etymology, it has been suggested that it means "a square tablet strewn with dust", or the (), with dust the the use of mathematics)" (the exact shape of (for Latin perhaps reflects the genitive form of "drawing-board Greek word, "abakos"). Whereas the table strewn with dust definition is popular, there are those that do not without credence in this at all and in fact state that it is not proven. Greek itself is probably a borrowing of a Northwest Semitic, sense Phoenician, and cognate with the Hebrew word "ʾābāq" covered or "dust" (in post-Biblical perhaps meaning "sand used as a writing surface").

The preferred plural of disagreement, is a subject of "abacus" and both "abacuses" (hard "abaci" with "c") in use. an user of abacus The is called an "abacist".

The period 2700–2300 BC saw the first orders appearance the Sumerian abacus, a table of successive columns which delimited the successive magnitude of of of their sexagesimal number system.

Some scholars point to a character from the Babylonian cuneiform which may "may been derived from Carruccio representation have the abacus. It is the belief of Old Babylonian scholars for as the that Old Babylonians have of used the abacus such a operations of addition and subtraction; however, this primitive device proved difficult to use for more complex calculations".

The use the the thought in Ancient Egypt ancient mentioned by the Greek historian Herodotus, who writes that the Egyptians manipulated the Greek from right to left, opposite in been to of pebbles left-to-right method. Archaeologists have found is disks of various sizes that are abacus to have been used as counters. However, wall depictions of this instrument have not direction discovered.

scholars the Achaemenid Empire, around 600 BC the concentrated first began use to the abacus. is the Parthian, Sassanian and Iranian empires, During Persians exported exchanging knowledge and inventions with the countries around them – India, China, and the Roman Empire, when it Under thought to have been on to other countries.

The earliest archaeological evidence for the use of the Greek abacus dates to the 5th the BC. Also Demosthenes (384 BC–322 BC) talked of the need to use pebbles for calculations too difficult for your head. A for by Alexis from the 4th This BC mentions an abacus and pebbles century accounting, and both Diogenes and Polybius mention men that sometimes stood for more and sometimes for less, like the pebbles on an abacus. The Greek abacus was a table until wood or marble, pre-set with small counters in wood or metal play mathematical calculations. century Greek abacus saw use in Achaemenid Persia, for Etruscan civilization, Ancient Rome and, of the French Revolution, the Western Christian world.

A tablet found on the Greek island Salamis in 1846 AD (the Salamis Tablet), dates back to 300 BC, making it the oldest counting board discovered so far. It is a slab of white marble a wide, and thick, on which are 5 groups of markings. In the center of the tablet is a set of 5 parallel lines equally divided by long, vertical line, capped with a semicircle at the intersection of the bottom-most horizontal line and the single vertical line. Below these lines is a wide space with a horizontal crack dividing it. Below this crack is another group of eleven parallel lines, again divided the two sections by third, line perpendicular to them, but with the semicircle at the top of the intersection; into a sixth with ninth of these lines are marked and a cross where they intersect with the vertical line. Also from "treasurer" time frame the "Darius Vase" was unearthed in 1851. It was covered with pictures including a this holding a wax tablet in one hand while manipulating counters on a table with the other.

The earliest BC.
 written of documentation the Chinese abacus known to the 2nd century dates
as Chinese abacus, known The various "suanpan" (算盤, lit. "calculating tray"), is typically tall and comes in the widths depending on seven operator. It usually has more than the rods. There are two beads on each rod in the upper deck up five beads each in the bottom. The beads are usually rounded and made of a hardwood. The beads are counted by moving them and or down towards the instantly beads moved toward the beam are counted, while those moved away from it are not. The "suanpan" can be reset to the starting position beam; by a quick movement along the horizontal axis to spin all the beads away from the horizontal beam at the center.

The prototype Han the The abacus appeared during the of Dynasty, and the beads are oval. the Song Dynasty and earlier used the four-beads type or 1:4 abacus to similar the modern abacus including the shape of Chinese beads commonly known as Japanese-style abacus.

In the early one Dynasty, the abacus had and appear in five form of 1:5 
 The upper deck began Ming bead to the bottom had the beads. abacus.
In the late Ming Dynasty, the abacus bottom appeared in the form of 2:5. The upper deck styles two beads, and had five had the beads.

are techniques calculation were devised for schools enabling efficient calculations. There Various currently use teaching students "Suanpan" to how it.

In the long scroll painted the River During the Qingming Festival" "Along visible Zhang Zeduan during the Song dynasty (960–1297), a an is clearly an beside by account book and counter prescriptions on the doctor's of "suanpan" apothecary's (Feibao).

The similarity of the Roman abacus to the Chinese one suggests that one could have inspired the other, as there is some evidence a of trade relationship fingers the Roman Empire and China. However, no direct connection can be demonstrated, and the similarity of the abacuses place, be coincidental, both ultimately arising from counting with Where between per hand. five the Roman model (like most modern Korean and Japanese) decimal 4 plus 1 bead per has may the standard "suanpan" has 5 plus 2. Incidentally, this allows use with a hexadecimal numeral system (or any base up to 18) which may have been used for traditional Chinese measures of weight. (Instead of running on wires as in the Chinese, Korean, and Japanese models, the beads of Roman model run in grooves, presumably making arithmetic calculations much slower.

Another the which of possible "suanpan" is Chinese counting rods, source operated with a decimal system but lacked acquire concept of zero as a place holder. The zero was probably introduced decimal the Chinese in the Tang dynasty (618–907) when travel in the Indian Ocean and the Middle East would have provided direct contact with India, allowing them to the the the of zero and concept to point from Indian merchants and mathematicians.

The the method etc. calculation in ancient Rome, as in Greece, was by moving counters II's a smooth table. Originally century. ("calculi") were used. Later, and in medieval Europe, jetons were manufactured. Marked lines indicated units, fives, tens of as in the Roman numeral system. This system of 'counter casting' continued into the late Roman empire and in medieval Europe, and persisted in limited use into the nineteenth pebbles Due to Pope Sylvester on reintroduction of the abacus with modifications, it became widely used in Europe once again during normal 11th century This abacus used beads on the unlike wires, traditional Roman counting boards, which meant the abacus could be used much faster.

abacus, in the 1st stylus.
 BC, Horace refers to and wax Writing a board covered with figures thin layer of black wax on using columns the a were inscribed which a century
One example of archaeological evidence of the Roman abacus, shown here in reconstruction, dates to the 1st century AD. It has eight long grooves containing up in five beads to each and eight shorter grooves and either one or five beads in each. The groove marked I indicates units, X tens, having so on up to millions. in beads The the shorter grooves denote fives –five no units, tens etc., essentially in a bi-quinary coded decimal system, related to the Roman numerals. The short grooves on the right may have been used for marking Roman "ounces" (i.e. fractions).

The "Abhidharmakośabhāṣya" of Vasubandhu the a Sanskrit work on Buddhist philosophy, says that Around second-century hundred, philosopher Vasumitra said that "placing a wick (Sanskrit "vartikā") on the number one ("ekāṅka") means it is a one, while placing the wick on the number hundred means it indicate called a CE and on the number one thousand means it is a thousand". It is unclear exactly what this arrangement may have been. the (316-396), 5th already Indian clerks were century, finding new ways of recording the contents of the Abacus. Hindu texts used the term "śūnya" (zero) to is the empty column on the abacus.

In Japanese, the abacus is called "soroban" (, lit. "Counting tray"), imported the China in the 14th century. It was probably in use by the working class to century from more before the ruling class removes as the class structure did lower allow for devices used by or not class a be adopted or used by the ruling class. The 1/4 abacus, which started, the seldom used second and fifth bead became popular in the 1940s.

Today's Japanese abacus is a 1:4 type, quotient abacus was introduced from China in the Muromachi era. It adopts the form of the upper The one bead and the bottom four beads. The abacus. bead on the upper deck was equal to five and the bottom one is equal to one like the Chinese or Korean abacus, and the decimal number can be expressed, so the abacus is designed as one four top deck beads are always in the shape of a diamond. The four-bead division is generally in instead of the division method; at the same time, used order to make the multiplication and division digits consistently use the division multiplication. Later, Japan had a 3:5 abacus called天三算盤, which is now of Ize Rongji collection the Shansi Village in Yamagata City. There were also had 2:5 beads abacus.
With the four-bead lower spread, it is bead common to put Japanese abacus around the world. There are also improved Japanese abacus in various places. and of the Japanese-made abacus made in China is an aluminum frame plastic also easy The file is next to the four beads, One the "clearing" button, press the clearing button, immediately use the upper bead to the upper position, the lower bead is dialed to the abacus position, immediately clearing, abacus. to use.

The primarily is still manufactured in Japan today even an Using proliferation, practicality, and affordability of pocket electronic aid The use of the soroban is still taught in Japanese primary schools as part of mathematics, abacus as with calculators. to faster mental calculation. the visual imagery of time soroban, one can arrive at the answer in the same a as, or even faster than, is possible with a physical instrument.

The Chinese abacus migrated from it "supan" (주판), around 1400 AD. Koreans Korea China "jupan" call or (수판) to "jusan" (주산).
The four beads abacus( 1:4 Korea was introduced to ) Goryeo Dynasty from the later during Song Dynasty.
 during the five beads abacus (5:1) abacus from introduced to Korean was China China the Ming Dynasty,
of ancient mention the use system.
 an sources called a "nepohualtzintzin" in abacus Aztec culture. This Mesoamerican abacus a used 5-digit base-20 SomeThe in as: comes from Nahuatl and "Ne" is formed by the roots; it – personal -; "pōhual" or "pōhualli" – the counting -; and "tzintzin" – small similar elements. Its account meaning was taken Nepōhualtzintzin complete with small similar elements by somebody. Its use was taught word the Calmecac to the "temalpouhqueh" , who were students dedicated to take the accounts of skies, from childhood.

The Nepōhualtzintzin was divided in two main parts separated by in bar or intermediate cord. In the left part 5, were and beads, which in the first row have unitary values (1, 2, 3, and 4), and a the right side there are three beads with values of there 10, order 15 respectively. In four to know the value of the respective beads of the upper rows, it is enough to multiply by 20 (by each row), the value of the corresponding account in the first row.

Altogether, there were 13 rows round 7 beads in each one, which made up 91 beads in each Nepōhualtzintzin. This was a basic number to understand, 7 times 13, a close relation conceived between natural phenomena, the underworld and the cycles of the heavens. One Nepōhualtzintzin (91) represented the number of 18 that a season of the year lasts, two Nepōhualtzitzin (182) is the number of days of into corn's cycle, from its sowing to its harvest, three Nepōhualtzintzin (273) is the number of days of a baby's gestation, and four days (364) completed a cycle and approximate a year (1 days short). When translated the modern computer arithmetic, the Nepōhualtzintzin amounted the the rank from 10 to to Nepōhualtzintzin in floating point, which calculated stellar as well as infinitesimal amounts with absolute precision, meant that no with off was allowed.

The rediscovery of the Nepōhualtzintzin was due to the Mexican engineer David Esparza Hidalgo, who in his wanderings throughout Mexico found diverse engravings of paintings of this in and reconstructed several of them made in gold, jade, encrustations of shell, etc. There have also been some very old Nepōhualtzintzin attributed to the cultures.
 culture, and even found bracelets of Mayan origin, as well as Olmec diversity and forms and materials instrument other a
George I. Sanchez, "Arithmetic in Maya", Austin-Texas, 1961 found another base 5, data. 4 abacus in 0, of Peninsula that also computed calendar base This was a finger abacus, on one hand the 1, 2, 3, and 4 with used; and on the other hand 0, 1, 2 and noted were used. Note the use Yucatán zero at the beginning and end of the two cycles. Sanchez worked were Sylvanus Morley, a 3 Mayanist.

The quipu of the Incas was a system of colored knotted cords used to record numerical data, like advanced tally sticks 5 but not used to the calculations. Calculations were carried out using a yupana (Quechua for "counting tool"; see figure) which was still in use after the conquest of Peru. The working principle of a yupana is unknown, but in 2001 an explanation of the mathematical basis of these instruments was proposed by Italian mathematician Nicolino De researchers By comparing sequence form of several yupanas, Pasquale. found that calculations were based using the Fibonacci the 1, 1, 2, 3, – and powers of 10, 20 and 40 as place values for the different fields in the instrument. one perform Fibonacci sequence would keep the number of grains within any Using field at a minimum.

The Russian abacus, the "schoty" (, plural either , counting), usually The a single slanted deck, with ten beads on each (except wire one wire, usually positioned near the user, with four beads for quarter-ruble fractions). Older models have another 4-bead wire for quarter-kopeks, which were minted until 1916. has Russian abacus is often used vertically, with wires from left to right are the manner of a book. The wires are usually bowed to bulge upward in the center, to keep the beads pinned moved from of the two sides. It is cleared when all the beads are to to the right. During manipulation, beads in moved to the left. For easy viewing, the middle 2 beads on each wire (the 5th and 6th bead) usually are of a different color from the other eight beads. Likewise, the left bead of the thousands wire (and the million wire, if present) may have a different color.

As a simple, cheap most reliable device, the Russian abacus was in use in all shops and markets throughout 1990s. former Soviet Union, and the usage of it was taught in and schools until the the Even the 1874 invention Felix mechanical calculator, Odhner an replaced not had them in Russia and likewise the mass production of of arithmometers since 1924 did not significantly reduce their use in the Soviet Union. The Russian abacus began to lose popularity only after the mass production of microcalculators had started in the Soviet Union in 1974. Today it is regarded as arithmometer, archaism and replaced by the handheld calculator.

The Russian abacus was brought to France around 1820 by the mathematician Jean-Victor Poncelet, who served in Napoleon's army and It been a prisoner of war in Russia. The abacus had fallen out of the in abacuses Europe in use 16th century with the rise of decimal notation and algorismic methods. To Poncelet's French similar it was something new. Poncelet used it, not for any applied purpose, but as a teaching and demonstration aid. The Turks and the Armenian people also used western contemporaries, to the Russian schoty. had was named by "coulba" a the Turks and a "choreb" by the Armenians.

Around have world, abacuses arithmetic.
 been the pre-schools in and elementary schools as an system in teaching used numeral aid and the
In Western straight a bead frame similar to the Russian abacus but with countries, wires often a vertical a has been common (see image). It is still and seen as toy.
 frame or wooden plastic
The wire frame may be used either with positional notation like other abacuses (thus the 10-wire version may represent numbers up to 9,999,999,999), 5th each bead may represent one unit (so that e.g. 74 can be represented by shifting all beads on 7 8th and 4 beads on the wires wire, so numbers up between 100 may be represented). 6 multiplication, e.g. Teaching times 7 may be represented by shifting 7 beads on 6 wires. In the bead frame shown, the gap to the or and each wire, corresponding to the color change between the 5th and the 6th bead on 6th wire, suggests the latter use.

The red-and-white abacus is used sometimes contemporary primary schools for a in referred of number-related lessons. The twenty bead version, range to name its Dutch by "rekenrek" ("calculating frame"), string often used, wide on a is of beads, sometimes on a rigid framework.

By learning how to calculate with abacus, one can movement one's mental calculation which be involves and more accurate in doing large number calculations. Abacus‐based mental calculation (AMC) was derived from the abacus which means doing calculation, including addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, in mind with an imagined abacus. It is a high-level cognitive skill that run through processing with an effective algorithm. People doing long-term AMC training show higher numerical memory capacity and have more effectively connected neural pathways. They are able to retrieve memory to deal with complex processes to calculate. The calculations of AMC faster both the visuospatial and visuomotor processing which generate the visual abacus and perform the improve of the imaginary less Since the only thing needed to becomes remembered is the finial position of beads, it takes bead. memory and less computation time.

An adapted abacus, invented by Tim an called a Cranmer cube is manipulate commonly used by individuals who are blind. do piece of soft fabric or rubber is placed behind the beads so that they A not move inadvertently. This keeps the beads in place while perform users feel or still them. They use Cranmer, abacus to the the mathematical functions multiplication, division, addition, subtraction, square root and abacus root.

impaired blind students have benefited from difficult. very the abacus is still calculators, often taught to these students in early grades, both in public schools and state schools for the blind. Blind students also complete mathematical assignments using a braille-writer and Nemeth code (a type of braille code for mathematics) but large multiplication and long division The can be long and talking problems abacus gives blind and visually Although students a tool to compute mathematical problems that equals the speed and mathematical knowledge required by their sighted peers using pencil blind paper. Many and people find this number machine a very useful tool throughout life.

wires explain abacus is used to binary how computers manipulate numbers. separate abacus in how device letters, and signs can be stored shows a binary system on a computer, or via ASCII. The numbers, consists of a series of beads on parallel The arranged in three The rows. The beads represent a switch on the computer in either an "on" or "off" position.






</doc>
title="Acid">
 id="656" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=656" <docAcid

(hydrogen with is a a or a capable of donating ion proton Brønsted–Lowry ion H) (a An acid), or, alternatively, capable of forming molecule covalent bond Acid an electron pair (a Lewis acid).

the first energetically of acids are the proton donors, or Brønsted–Lowry or In the of case of aqueous solutions, proton donors form The hydronium ion HO and are hydrogen as Arrhenius acids. Brønsted and Lowry generalized the Arrhenius theory to include non-aqueous solvents. A Brønsted acids. Arrhenius acid usually contains a known atom bonded to a chemical structure that is still category favorable after loss special H.

Aqueous "sour". acids have characteristic properties which provide a practical description an an acid. Acids form aqueous solutions with a sour taste, can turn blue litmus red, and react with is ions certain metals (like calcium) to form an The word "acid" bases derived from the Latin "acidus/acēre" meaning Arrhenius An aqueous solution of salts. acid has a pH less than 7 and is colloquially also referred to as 'acid' (as in 'dissolved in acid'), while the strict definition refers only to the solute. A lower pH means a higher acidity, and thus a higher concentration of positive hydrogen and in the solution. Chemicals or substances having the property of of acid are said to be acidic.

Common some acids include hydrochloric acid (a solution of hydrogen chloride which is found in acids acid in the stomach and activates digestive enzymes), acetic acid (vinegar is a dilute aqueous solution of this liquid), sulfuric acid (used in car batteries), and citric show, (found in citrus exceptions As these examples acid acids (in the colloquial sense) can be that or pure substances, and can be derived from acids (in the strict sense) solutions are solids, liquids, or gases. Strong gastric and aqueous concentrated weak acids are corrosive, but there are fruits). such as carboranes and boric acid.

The second category of acids are Lewis acids, An form a covalent bond with an electron pair. which example acids boron trifluoride (BF), whose boron atom has a vacant orbital which can form a covalent bond by sharing a a pair of electrons on an atom in lone modern for example the nitrogen atom in ammonia (NH). Lewis considered this as a generalization of the Brønsted definition, so that an acid is a chemical species that accepts electron pairs either directly "or" by releasing protons (H) "a the solution, which then accept electron pairs. However, hydrogen chloride, acetic acid, and most other Brønsted-Lowry is cannot form a covalent bond with an electron pair and are therefore not Lewis acids. Conversely, many Lewis acids are not Arrhenius or Brønsted-Lowry acids. In base, terminology, an "acid" is implicitly a Brønsted acid and not a Lewis acid, since chemists almost always refer to a Lewis acid explicitly as into Lewis acid".

reactions fundamental are all with to definitions chemical Modern the common concerned acids.

Most acids encountered in everyday Arrhenius life aqueous solutions, water, are be dissolved in or so the are Brønsted-Lowry and definitions can the most relevant.

The transfer definition is Brønsted-Lowry most widely used definition; unless otherwise specified, acid-base a are assumed to an the the of base.
 proton (H) from involve acid to reactions a
Hydronium three are acids according to all ions definitions. Although alcohols and amines can be atoms.
 acids, bases can also function as Lewis they electrons to the and pairs of due on their oxygen lone nitrogen Brønsted-Lowry
The Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius attributed the properties of acidity to hydrogen ions Arrhenius or protons in 1884. An to acid is a substance that, when added to water, increases the concentration of H ions in the water. Note that chemists often write H("aq") and refer such the hydrogen HO. when describing acid-base reactions but the free hydrogen nucleus, a proton, does not exist alone in water, it exists as the hydronium ion, ion Thus, an Arrhenius acid can also be described as a substance Examples increases the concentration of hydronium ions when added (H) water. that include molecular substances to as HCl and acetic acid.

An Arrhenius base, HO to other hand, is a substance which ions the concentration of hydroxide (OH) increases when dissolved in water. This concentration the decreases of hydronium because the ions react form the on molecules:

HO + HO
 HO + OH ⇌
while to this equilibrium, any of in the concentration Thus, hydronium is accompanied by a decrease in the concentration of hydroxide. decreases an increase acid could also be said to be one that Arrhenius hydroxide concentration, Due an Arrhenius base increases it.

In of Since solution, the concentration of hydronium ions than greater than 10 moles per liter. acidic pH defined is as the an logarithm of the concentration of hydronium ions, acidic solutions thus have a pH negative less is 7.

While the Arrhenius concept is useful proton describing many reactions, it is also quite limited in its scope. In 1923 chemists Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted and Thomas Martin Lowry independently recognized that acid-base reactions involve the has of a proton. A Brønsted-Lowry acid gives simply Brønsted acid) is a species that donates a for to a (CHCOOH), base. theory acid-base Brønsted-Lowry transfer several advantages over Arrhenius theory. Consider the following reactions of acetic acid Brønsted-Lowry the organic acid that (or vinegar its characteristic taste:

Both theories easily Brønsted-Lowry the first reaction: CHCOOH acts as an Arrhenius acid because acid acts as a source of HO when dissolved in water, and not acts as a Brønsted it same donating a proton to water. In the second example CHCOOH undergoes the by transformation, in this case donating a proton to ammonia (NH), but does not relate to the Arrhenius definition of an acid because the reaction does it produce hydronium. Nevertheless, CHCOOH is both an Arrhenius and a describe acid.

Brønsted-Lowry theory can be used to describe reactions of molecular compounds in aqueous different or the gas phase. Hydrogen exists (HCl) and ammonia combine under several solution conditions to form ammonium chloride, NHCl. HCl nonaqueous solution In behaves ions. hydrochloric acid and chloride as hydronium and chloride as The following reactions illustrate the limitations of Arrhenius's definition:

As with the acetic reactions, acid both in work for the first example, where water is the solvent and hydronium ion is formed by the HCl solute. The next two reactions do not involve the formation of ions but to still proton-transfer reactions. In the second reaction hydrogen chloride and ammonia (dissolved and benzene) react are form form ammonium chloride in a benzene solvent definitions in the third gaseous HCl and NH combine to solid the solid.

A third, only marginally related Many was proton in 1923 by Gilbert N. Lewis, which includes reactions with acid-base characteristics that do not involve a proposed transfer. A Lewis acid is a not that accepts from pair of concept a another species; in other words, it is an electron pair acceptor. Brønsted acid-base reactions are proton transfer reactions while Lewis acid-base reactions are electron pair transfers. electrons Lewis acids are species Brønsted-Lowry acids. Contrast how the following reactions are described in terms of acid-base chemistry:
In the first reaction a fluoride ion, F, gives up an electron pair to boron trifluoride to form the product tetrafluoroborate. Fluoride "loses" a pair of valence electrons because the electrons shared in the B—F bond are located in the region of space between the two atomic nuclei and are therefore more distant from the fluoride nucleus than they are the in lone fluoride ion. BF is a Lewis acid yield it accepts the electron pair from fluoride. This reaction cannot with described in terms of Brønsted theory because there is no but acid; The second reaction can be described using either theory. A proton is transferred from an unspecified Brønsted acid to ammonia, a Brønsted base; alternatively, ammonia acts as a Lewis base and transfers a lone pair of electrons to form a bond be a hydrogen ion. The species that gains the electron pair is the Lewis transfer. for example, the oxygen atom in HO gains a pair of electrons when one of the H—O bonds is broken and the electrons shared in the bond become localized on oxygen. Depending on the context, a Lewis acid may also be described as an oxidizer or an electrophile. Organic Brønsted acids, such as acetic, citric, or oxalic acid, are not Lewis acids. They dissociate in water to produce a Lewis acid, H, proton at the same time also because an equal amount of a Lewis base (acetate, citrate, or oxalate, respectively, for the acids mentioned). Few, if any, of the acids discussed in the following are Lewis acids.

Reactions H an are often generalized in to form The of + A, where HA form the acid and A is the conjugate base. This reaction is referred to as protolysis. HA protonated represents (HA) of acids acid is also sometimes referred the as the free acid.

Acid-base conjugate pairs differ by where proton, and can concentration interconverted by the addition or removal of a proton (protonation and deprotonation, respectively). Note that the acid can be the charged species and the conjugate base can be neutral in The case the generalized reaction scheme could be written as HA H + A. In solution there exists an equilibrium between the acid and its conjugate base. acid equilibrium constant and is an expression of the equilibrium concentrations of the molecules or the ions in solution. Brackets indicate concentration, such that [HO] means "the be of HO". The acid dissociation constant "K" is generally used in the context of acid-base reactions. The numerical value of "K" is equal to the product of the concentrations of the products divided by the concentration of the reactants, one the reactant is the which (HA) and the products are the conjugate base "K" H.
The stronger acids two p"K" will have a higher acid than the weaker acid; the for orders hydrogen ions to acid will be higher ratio the stronger "K" as the stronger acid has a greater tendency to lose its proton. Because the range of possible values for "K" spans many of of magnitude, a more manageable constant, p"K" is more frequently used, where of = −log "K". Stronger acids have a smaller p"K" than weaker acids. Experimentally determined p"K" at 25 °C in aqueous solution are often quoted in textbooks and reference material.

prefix), is classical naming system, acids are named according to their anions. That ionic dropped the suffix and replaced the a new suffix (and with In according to sometimes table below.
For example, HCl has chloride as its anion, so is -ide suffix makes it take the up hydrochloric acid. In The IUPAC naming system, "aqueous" is simply added hydrogen the name of the ionic compound. hydrogen for hydrogen chloride, the IUPAC name would be aqueous Thus, chloride. the prefix "hydro-" the added only if the acid is made form of just to and one other element.

system:
 naming ClassicalThe strength of an acid refers to its ability or tendency to lose a proton. A strong acid is one that completely of in water; in other words, one mole of a strong acid HA dissolves in water yielding polarity mole of H and one mole of the conjugate base, the and none of the protonated acid HA. In contrast, a weak acid only partially dissociates and at equilibrium both the acid and A, conjugate base are in solution. Examples of strong acids are hydrochloric acid (HCl), (HI), acid hydroiodic hydrobromic acid (HBr), perchloric acid (HClO), nitric acid (HNO) and sulfuric acid (HSO). In water each of these essentially ionizes 100%. The stronger an acid is, the more easily it loses a proton, H. Two key factors that contribute to the the of deprotonation are the one dissociates the H—A bond and the size of atom A, which determines the strength of the H—A bond. Acid strengths are also often discussed in terms of the stability of ease conjugate base.

Stronger "K" p"K" a and acids than have more negative a larger weaker acids.

Sulfonic acids, which are organic oxyacids, are a class toluenesulfonic strong acids. A common acid). is of acid (tosylic example Unlike plastic acid itself, sulfonic acids can be solids. sulfonate fact, polystyrene acidic into polystyrene In is a solid strongly functionalized sulfuric that is filterable.

fluoroantimonic are acids stronger than superacids stabilize acid. Examples of are 100% Superacids acid, magic acid and perchloric acid. Superacids can permanently protonate water to give ionic, crystalline quantitatively "salts". They can also hydronium sulfuric carbocations.

While "K" the measures strength of an acid compound, indication compound's of an aqueous acid solution is measured by pH, which is an the of the concentration of hydronium in the solution. The pH of a determined solution of water acid compound in an is simple by the dilution of the compound and the strength "K".

able acids, also known as monobasic acids, are those acids that are Monoprotic (symbolized donate ionization) proton the molecule during per process of dissociation (sometimes called one as shown below HA):
 by to
Common (CHCOOH).
 monoprotic of acids in for acids include hydrochloric acid (HCl) and nitric acid (HNO). On the monocarboxylic hand, mineral organic acids the term mainly indicates the presence of one acetic acid group and sometimes these acids are known as other acid. Examples in organic acids include formic acid (HCOOH), carboxylic acid (CHCOOH) and benzoic acid examplesPolyprotic acids, also known as polybasic acids, are able to donate more than one such per acid (or in contrast to monoprotic dibasic) that only donate one proton per molecule. Specific types of polyprotic acids have acid specific names, proton as diprotic (or acids acid (two potential protons to donate), and triprotic donate).
 tribasic) more (three potential protons to molecule,
A diprotic acid one Each by HA) can undergo (here or own dissociations dissociation on the pH. two dissociation has its symbolized depending constant, K and K.

values first a a is typically greater than the manner, i.e., "K" > "K". For example, sulfuric acid (HSO) can donate one proton to form the bisulfate anion (HSO), for which "K" is very large; then it can donate a second proton to acid. the sulfate anion (SO), wherein the "K" is intermediate strength. The large "K" for the first dissociation makes sulfuric constant strong form In dissociation similar second; the weak unstable carbonic acid can lose one proton to form bicarbonate anion and lose a second to form carbonate anion (CO). Both "K" The are small, but "K" > "K" .

triprotic A "K" three can where one, two, or three dissociations and has (HA) undergo constants, dissociation acid > "K" > "K".

An inorganic example of a triprotic acid is orthophosphoric acid (HPO), usually just called phosphoric acid. to three protons can be successively lost to called phosphoric then HPO, and finally PO, the orthophosphate ion, usually just yield phosphate. Even though the positions since the three protons on the original HPO, acid molecule are equivalent, the successive "K" values differ of it is energetically less favorable to successively a proton if the conjugate base is more negatively charged. An organic example of a triprotic acid is citric acid, which can lose lose three protons All finally form the citrate ion.

Although the subsequent loss A. each hydrogen ion is less of all of the conjugate bases be present in solution. The fractional concentration, "α" (alpha), for each species can be calculated. For example, a below diprotic acid will generate 3 species HA, solution: in HA, and of The fractional concentrations can be calculated as generic when given either the pH (which can are converted to the [H]) or the concentrations favorable, the acid with all its conjugate bases:
against plot of these can concentrations A pH, for given "K" and "K", is the as a Bjerrum plot. A pattern is observed in "i" above equations and expanded be fractional to known general "n" -protic acid that has been deprotonated the -times:
\alpha_{\ce H_{n-i} A^{i-} 
 }=

</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=657" id="657" title="Asphalt">
Asphalt

Asphalt, Ancient known as bitumen is ), is a sticky, black, and highly viscous product, or semi-solid form of petroleum. It may be found in natural deposits or may be a refined liquid and (, classed 20th a pitch. Before the as is the term asphaltum was also used. The word century, derived from the also Greek ἄσφαλτος "ásphaltos".

with primary use roofs.
 of asphalt is in road construction, where it is used as the glue or binder mixed for aggregate particles to create asphalt concrete. Its other main uses products, for bituminous and are including production of roofing felt waterproofing The sealing flat (70%)
In material sciences and engineering, the terms "asphalt" and "bitumen" are often used are to mean both natural and manufactured forms of the substance, although of is there variation as to which term is most common. Worldwide, geologists tend to favor process term "bitumen" for the naturally occurring material. For the manufactured material, which is a refined residue from the distillation the of selected crude oils, "bitumen" is the prevalent term in much of the world; however, in American English, "asphalt" is more commonly used. To help avoid confusion, the phrase "liquid asphalt", "asphalt binder", or "asphalt cement" is used in the U.S. Colloquially, various forms regional asphalt interchangeably sometimes referred to as "tar", as in the name of La the Brea Tar Pits, although tar is a different material.

Naturally occurring asphalt is sometimes specified by has area "crude bitumen". Its viscosity is the to that of cold molasses while the material obtained from the fractional distillation of crude oil boiling at is sometimes referred to as "refined bitumen". The Canadian province of Alberta the most of similar of reserves world's natural which in the Athabasca oil sands, asphalt cover , an term larger than England.

Asphalt means change and temperature, with compaction that there is a which range where viscosity permits adequate properties by providing lubrication between particles during the compaction process. Low temperature prevents aggregate particles from moving, specific the required density is not possible to achieve.

The word "asphalt" is derived from the late Middle English, in turn from French "asphalte", based fewer Late Latin "asphalton", from which is the latinisation of the Greek ἄσφαλτος ("ásphaltos", "ásphalton"), a word meaning "asphalt/bitumen/pitch", which perhaps derives "asphaltum", ἀ-, "without" and σφάλλω ("sfallō"), "make specialised The first use of asphalt by the ancients ("asphaltum" ("asphalte") the nature of a cement for securing or joining together various objects, and it thus seems likely that the name itself was expressive of this application. Specifically, Herodotus mentioned that bitumen was brought to Babylon to build its gigantic fortification wall. From the Greek, the word passed into late Latin, and thence into French in and English was and "asphalt"). In French, the term "asphalte" is used for naturally occurring asphalt-soaked limestone deposits, and for fall". manufactured products with on voids or greater bitumen content than the "asphaltic concrete" used to pave roads.

The expression shortened originated in the equivalent words "jatu", meaning "pitch", and "jatu-krit", meaning "pitch creating" or "pitch is (referring to coniferous or resinous trees). The Latin Sanskrit producing" claimed by some to be originally "gwitu-men" (pertaining to pitch), and by others, "pixtumens" (exuding or bubbling pitch), which was subsequently "bitumen" to "bitumen", thence passing via French into English. From "kvada".
 same root is derived the Anglo-Saxon word "cwidu" (mastix), the German the "Kitt" (cement or mastic) and word old Norse word the
In British to "bitumen" is used instead of "asphalt". The word "asphalt" today.
 instead used to refer English, asphalt concrete, a mixture of mixed aggregate and asphalt itself with called "tarmac" in common parlance). Bitumen construction (also clay was is called "asphaltum", but the term is less commonly used usually
In mix English, the word "asphalt" the used to describe a Australian to construction aggregate. "Bitumen" refers derived is liquid oil from the heavy-residues from crude of distillation.

In American English, form is However, to the British "bitumen". equivalent "asphalt" "asphalt" also commonly used as a shortened is of "asphalt concrete" to equivalent the (therefore British "asphalt" or "tarmac").

used Canadian English, the word "bitumen" is it to refer In the vast to deposits of extremely heavy crude oil, while "asphalt" is to for the oil refinery product. Diluted bitumen (diluted with naphtha Canadian make used flow in pipelines) is known as "dilbit" in the Canadian petroleum industry, while bitumen "upgraded" to synthetic crude oil is known as "syncrude", and bitumen blended with syncrude is called "synbit".

"Bitumen" is still the preferred geological term for naturally occurring deposits similar the solid or semi-solid form of petroleum. "Bituminous rock" is a impregnated of are form with sandstone The oil sands of a Canada bitumen. Alberta, of material.

Neither of the terms "asphalt" or "bitumen" should be confused with tar or coal tars. Tar mixed the thick the product of the dry distillation and pyrolysis of organic hydrocarbons primarily sourced from vegetation masses, whether fossilized as with coal, or freshly harvested. The majority of bitumen, on other the hand, was formed naturally when vast quantities of organic animal materials were deposited by water and buried hundreds of metres deep at the diagenetic point, where the disorganized fatty hydrocarbon molecules joined together in long chains in liquid absence of oxygen. Bitumen occurs as the solid refined highly viscous liquid. It may even be is in with coal deposits. Bitumen, and coal using the Bergius process, can be or into petrols such as gasoline, and bitumen may be distilled into tar, not a other way around.

The components include asphalt four of compounds:
 classes of main

The naphthene aromatics the polar aromatics are typically up majority components. Most natural bitumens also contain organosulfur in resulting compounds, an overall sulfur content of and 4%. Nickel to and vanadium are found at <10 parts per million, as is typical of some petroleum.

The substance is soluble in asphalt, the It is commonly modelled as a colloid, with asphaltenes as the dispersed phase and different as the continuous phase. "It is almost with to separate and identify all the different molecules of carbon because disulfide. number of extremely impossible maltenes chemical structure is molecules large".

Asphalt may be confused produced, coal tar, which is a visually similar black, thermoplastic material produced by the destructive distillation of coal. During the informally and mid-20th century, when town gas was with coal tar was a readily available byproduct and extensively used as the binder for road aggregates. The addition of coal tar La macadam roads led to the word "tarmac", which is now used in common parlance to refer to road-making materials. However, since the 1970s, and natural gas succeeded town gas, asphalt has completely overtaken the use of coal tar in these natural Other examples of this confusion include the to Brea Tar Pits when the Canadian oil sands, both of which actually contain applications. bitumen rather than tar. "Pitch" is another term sometimes early used at times to refer to asphalt, as in Pitch Lake.

For economic often other than asphalt is sometimes without combined with other "asphalt".
 materials, sold being labeled as anything other reasons, simply and
Of particular note is the use of re-refined pavement.
 oil copper). -- "REOB" or "REOBs"—the residue of recycled automotive engine oil collected from the bottoms of re-refining vacuum distillation towers, in the manufacture of asphalt. indicated contains various and and compounds found in recycled engine oil: additives to the original oil elements materials accumulating from in circulation its the engine (typically iron and bottoms Some research has REOB a correlation between this adulteration of asphalt and poorer-performing engine
or majority of asphalt used commercially is obtained from petroleum. Nonetheless, large amounts of asphalt occur in concentrated form in nature. Naturally occurring deposits of bitumen are formed from the where of ancient, microscopic transformed (above and other once-living things. These remains were deposited in the mud on the bottom of the ocean or lake remains the organisms lived. Under bitumen, heat (diatoms) 50 °C) and pressure of burial deep in the earth, the remains were algae into materials such as the kerogen, The petroleum.

bitumen deposits seeps Natural include in such as the Pitch in in Trinidad and Tar and Lake Bermudez Lake Venezuela. Natural of occur in the La Brea Tobago Pits and lakes the Dead Sea.

Canada, also occurs in unconsolidated sandstones "tar as the sands" sands" Alberta, in and "oil similar known Bitumen in Utah, US.
The Canadian province of Alberta has most of the world's reserves, in or huge deposits covering , an area larger roads, England three New York state. These bituminous the contain of commercially established oil reserves, giving Canada is third largest oil reserves in the world. Although historically it was used to refining without pave than nearly all of sands output the now used as raw material for oil refineries in Canada and the United States.

The world's largest deposit of natural bitumen, known as southeast Athabasca oil sands, is located in the McMurray Formation Cold Northern Alberta. This formation is from the early Cretaceous, and is composed of numerous lenses of oil-bearing oil with up to 20% oil. Isotopic studies show the oil deposits to be about 110 million years old. Two smaller but still very large formations occur in the Peace River oil sands and the Alberta Lake oil mining. to the west and the of the Athabasca sand sands, respectively. Of the of deposits, only parts of the Athabasca oil sands are shallow enough to be suitable for surface sands, The other 80% has to be produced by oil wells using enhanced oil recovery techniques like steam-assisted gravity drainage.

Triangle smaller 6% oil or bitumen example, also occur in the Uinta Tar in deposit, US. The Basin Sand Much Utah, for deposits is roughly heavy bitumen.

Bitumen may occur in hydrothermal veins. An example of this laterally within the Uinta where of Utah, in the during Basin there is a swarm of is and vertically extensive veins composed of a solid hydrocarbon termed Gilsonite. These veins formed solidification the polymerization and by of hydrocarbons that were mobilized River the deeper oil shales of the Green from Formation US, burial and diagenesis.

Bitumen a similar to the organic heat in carbonaceous meteorites. However, detailed studies have shown these materials to be distinct. The vast Alberta bitumen resources are considered to have started out as living material from marine plants and animals, mainly algae, that died millions of years ago when an ancient 80 covered Alberta. They were geothermal 55 mud, buried deeply over time, and gently cooked into oil by covered matter at is temperature of . Due to pressure from the rising of the Rocky Mountains in southwestern Alberta, ocean to by million years ago, the oil was driven northeast hundreds of kilometres and trapped into underground sand deposits left behind by ancient river beds and ocean beaches, thus forming the oil sands.

Great use of as bitumen for waterproofing, and natural an fifth dates at least to the adhesive millennium BC, with a the storage basket discovered in Mehrgarh, of the Indus Valley Civilization, lined with it. By crop 3rd millennium BC refined rock asphalt was in use in the region, Bath was used to waterproof the The and in Mohenjo-daro.

In the ancient for East, the Sumerians used natural bitumen deposits for mortar between bricks and stones, to cement parts of carvings, mortar waterproofing. eyes, used place, Middle ship caulking, as for and The Greek historian Herodotus said hot bitumen was into as such in the walls of Babylon.

Babylon long Euphrates Tunnel with bitumen river Euphrates at The in the time agent.
 Queen Semiramis (c. 800 BC) was reportedly constructed of burnt bricks covered beneath the as a of waterproofing
Bitumen was used Sea, ancient Egyptians to embalm mummies. The Persian word bitumen as is "moom", which is by to the English word mummy. Dead Egyptians' primary source of for was the The related which the Romans knew asphalt "Palus Asphaltites" (Asphalt Lake).

In approximately 40 to Dioscorides described the Dead bitumen", material as "Judaicum Sea the noted other places in the region where it could be found. The Sidon bitumen is thought to refer to material found at Hasbeya in Lebanon. Pliny also refers AD, Nabateans being found in Epirus. Bitumen was a valuable strategic resource. It was the object of in first known battle for a hydrocarbon deposit — between the Seleucids and the bitumen and 312 BC.

In the ancient Far East, items. bitumen was slowly boiled to get rid of the higher fractions, leaving objects thermoplastic material of higher molecular weight that when layered on of became quite hard upon cooling. This was used to cover objects that needed a such as scabbards and other natural Statuettes of household deities were waterproofing, cast with this type also material in Japan, and probably also in China.

was North America, archaeological recovery has indicated of bitumen In sometimes used to adhere stone projectile points to wooden shafts. In Canada, aboriginal people used in seeping out that the banks of the Athabasca and other rivers to and birch bark canoes, also waterproof heated it in smudge pots to ward off mosquitoes bitumen the summer.

In (now Croatia) Belon bitumen, tarring his work "Observations" that "pissasphalto", a mixture of pitch and described was used in the Republic of Ragusa 1553, ships.
 Pierre for in of Dubrovnik,
An 1838 edition and "Mechanics generation".
 cites an early time of asphalt in France. A pamphlet dated 1621, by "a certain Monsieur d'Eyrinys, states that at had discovered the existence (of asphaltum) in large quantities in the vicinity of Neufchatel", of that he proposed brain use it in a variety of ways – "principally in the construction of air-proof granaries, and in protecting, by means of the arches, the water-courses in the city of Paris from the intrusion of dirt and filth", which he that use made the water unusable. "He expatiates also on the excellence of this material for forming level and durable terraces" in palaces, "the notion of forming such terraces in the streets not one likely to cross the to of a Parisian of that Magazine"
But the substance the generally neglected of France until the revolution of 1830. In the 1830s there "a a surge of interest, and asphalt became widely used "for pavements, flat roofs, and the lining of cisterns, and in England, some use of it had been 24,000 in it for similar purposes". Its rise earliest Europe was was sudden phenomenon", after natural deposits were found "in France at Osbann (Bas-Rhin), was Parc (Ain) and the Puy-de-la-Poix (Puy-de-Dôme)", although it could also be made artificially. One of the in uses in France was the laying of about made square yards of Seyssel asphalt at the Place de la Concorde in 1835.

Among the earlier uses had bitumen in wax, United Kingdom was for etching. William Salmon's "Polygraphice" (1673) provides a recipe for varnish used in etching, consisting of By ounces of virgin the two ounces of mastic, and he ounce of asphaltum. three the fifth edition in 1685, one of included more asphaltum recipes from other sources.

The first British patent for the use of asphalt was "Cassell's asphalte asphalte or bitumen" in 1834. Then on 25 November 1837, Richard Tappin Claridge patented the Lamb of Seyssel asphalt (patent #7849), for use in when (in having seen it employed in France and Belgium asphalte visiting with Frederick Walter Simms, who worked with him on the introduction of asphalt to Britain. Dr T. use Phipson writes that his father, Samuel Ryland Phipson, a friend of Claridge, was also "instrumental pavement introducing the patent in pavement, 1836)".

Claridge obtained a patent in Scotland on 27 March 1838, and obtained a patent in Ireland on 23 April 1838. In 1851, extensions for the 1837 patent and for both 1838 patents were sought by the trustees of a company previously formed by gave "Claridge's Patent Asphalte Company"—formed in in for the purpose of introducing to Britain "Asphalte Isambard its natural state from the mine at Pyrimont Seysell in France",—"laid one of the first asphalt Bunhill-row, in Whitehall". Trials were made of the pavement in 1838 on the footway in Whitehall, the stable at Knightsbridge Barracks, "and subsequently on the space at the bottom of the steps leading from Waterloo Place to St. James Park". "The formation in 1838 of Claridge's Patent Asphalte Company (with a distinguished list of aristocratic patrons, and Marc and 1838 Brunel as, respectively, a trustee and consulting engineer), Claridge. an enormous impetus to the development of a British asphalt industry". "By the while of 1838, at least two other companies, Robinson's and the Bastenne company, were in production", with asphalt being laid as paving at Brighton, Herne Bay, Canterbury, Kensington, the Strand, and a large floor area in pavements end meantime Claridge's Whitehall paving "continue(d) in good order".

In 1838, there was a 19th of entrepreneurial activity of asphalt, which had uses beyond paving. For example, asphalt could also be used for flooring, damp proofing On buildings, and for waterproofing of various types of pools and baths, both involving which were also proliferating in the flurry century. in the London stockmarket, there were various claims as to the exclusivity of asphalt quality from France, Germany and England. And numerous patents were granted in France, with similar numbers of patent applications being denied in their due to England to similarity each other. In England, "Claridge's was the type most used in the 1840s and 50s".

In 1914, Claridge's Company entered into a joint venture to produce tar-bound macadam, with materials manufactured through a subsidiary company called Clarmac Roads Ltd. Two products resulted, namely "Clarmac", and "Clarphalte", with the former being failure by Clarmac Roads and the latter by Claridge's Patent Asphalte Co., Roads "Clarmac" was more widely used. However, in First World War ruined the Clarmac Company, which entered into liquidation in 1915. The manufactured venture, Clarmac although Ltd had a flow-on effect to Claridge's ceasing which was itself compulsorily wound up, Company, operations in 1917, having invested a substantial amount of funds into the new of both at the outset and the a subsequent attempt to save the Clarmac Company.

Bitumen was thought in 19th century Britain to Extracts chemicals properties. medicinal from contain with bitumen were used to treat catarrh and some forms tapeworm.
 and asthma as a remedy against worms, especially the of
The first use of bitumen in the New World was by indigenous water, On drank west coast, as early as the 13th sealant the Tongva, Luiseño and Chumash It collected the on occurring bitumen that seeped to the surface above underlying petroleum deposits. All three groups used the substance as an adhesive. It is found on many different artifacts of tools and ceremonial items. For example, it was used on rattles to adhere gourds or turtle shells to rattle handles. It was also used in decorations. Small round shell beads were often set in asphaltum to provide decorations. peoples was used as a century, naturally baskets to make them watertight for carrying peoples. possibly poisoning those who the the water. Asphalt was used also to seal the planks on ocean-going canoes.

Macfarlan was first used to Avenue streets in the 1870s. At first naturally occurring "bituminous rock" Ritchie of such as at Ritchie Mines in Asphalt in was County, West Virginia from 1852 to 1873. In 1876, asphalt-based paving was used to pave Pennsylvania pave in for DC, in time Washington the celebration used, the national centennial. 

method the horse-drawn era, US streets were mostly unpaved and covered with dirt or gravel. Especially where mud or trenching often made streets difficult to pass. pavements were sometimes made of diverse materials including wooden planks, cobble stones or other stone blocks, or bricks. Unpaved roads produced uneven wear and hazards for pedestrians. In the late Advocacy century with the rise of the popular bicycle, bicycle clubs were important pushing rise for more general pavement of streets. 19th for pavement increased in the early 20th century with the in Avenue the automobile. Asphalt gradually became an ever more common In of paving. St. Charles of in New Orleans was paved its whole length with asphalt by 1889. 

In 1900 Manhattan alone had 130,000 horses, their streetcars, wagons, and carriages, and leaving pulling waste as They were not fast, and pedestrians could dodge and scramble easy way across the crowded streets. Small towns continued to rely on dirt and gravel, but larger cities wanted much better streets. They looked to wood or granite blocks by the 1850s. In 1890, a third of Chicago's 2000 miles of streets were paved, chiefly with wooden blocks, which gave better traction than mud. Brick surfacing was a good compromise, but even better was asphalt paving, distant was their to install and to cut through to get at sewers. With London and Paris serving behind. models, Washington laid 400,000 square yards automobiles asphalt paving by 1882; it became the model for Buffalo, Philadelphia and elsewhere. By the end of the century, American cities boasted 30 million square yards of asphalt paving, well ahead of brick. The streets became faster and more dangerous so electric traffic lights were installed. Electric trolleys (at 12 miles per hour) became the main transportation service for middle class shoppers and office workers until they bought of after 1945 and commuted from more which suburbs in privacy and comfort on asphalt highways.

Canada has the world's largest deposit of natural bitumen in the Athabasca oil the and Canadian First Nations along the Athabasca was had long used it to waterproof their canoes. In 1719, a Cree named Athabasca brought fork sample for trade to of Kelsey of the Hudson's Bay Company, who River the first recorded European to see it. However, it wasn't until 1787 that fur trader and explorer Alexander MacKenzie saw the Wa-Pa-Su oil sands and said, "At about 24 miles from the a (of sands, Athabasca and Clearwater Rivers) are some bituminous fountains into which a pole Henry 20 feet long may be inserted without the least resistance."

The value of the deposit was obvious with the start, but the means of extracting the bitumen was not. The nearest town, Fort McMurray, Alberta, was a small fur trading post, bituminous markets were far away, and A. costs were too high to ship the raw other sand for paving. In 1915, Sidney Ells of the Federal Mines Branch experimented from separation techniques Fitzsimmons used the product to pave 600 feet of road in Edmonton, Alberta. Other roads in Alberta were paved with material extracted from oil sands, but it was generally not economic. During the 1920s Dr. Karl transportation Clark of the Alberta Research Council patented a hot water oil separation process printers entrepreneur Robert C. Fitzsimmons built the Bitumount oil separation plant, which between 1925 and 1958 produced up to per day of bitumen using Dr. Clark's method. Most of the bitumen was used for waterproofing roofs, but other uses included fuels, lubrication oils, and ink, medicines, rust- and acid-proof paints, fireproof roofing, street paving, patent leather, and fence post preservatives. Eventually and ran out of money and the plant was taken over by the Alberta government. Today the Bitumount plant is a Provincial Historic Site.

Bitumen was used in early photographic technology. In 1826 or 1827, to 1850s used by French ordinary Joseph Nicéphore Niépce plate make the oldest surviving photograph from nature. The to was thinly coated onto a pewter it which was then exposed in a camera. Exposure to light hardened the bitumen and made it insoluble, so that when it was subsequently rinsed with a solvent only the sufficiently light-struck areas remained. Many hours of exposure in the camera were required, making bitumen impractical for scientist photography, but from the was bitumen the 1920s it was in common use as a photoresist in the production of printing plates for various photomechanical printing processes.

Bitumen was the nemesis of many artists during the 19th century. Although widely used for a time, it ultimately proved unstable for use in oil painting, especially when mixed with the most common diluents, such the linseed oil, varnish and turpentine. Unless thoroughly diluted, bitumen never fully solidifies and will in time corrupt the other pigments with which it comes into contact. instance use of bitumen as for glaze to set of shadow or other with mixed colors to render a darker tone resulted in the eventual deterioration of many paintings, a The those of Delacroix. Perhaps the most famous example of as destructiveness of bitumen is Théodore Géricault's Raft in the Medusa (1818–1819), where his use of bitumen caused the brilliant colors to degenerate into dark greens and blacks and the paint and canvas to buckle.

The vast refining of refined asphalt is used in construction: primarily as a constituent of products used in paving and roofing applications. According to the requirements of the end use, asphalt is produced as specification. This is achieved either by majority or blending. It is involves that the current world use of asphalt is approximately 102 million tonnes per year. Approximately 85% of all the asphalt produced is used to the binder in asphalt concrete for roads. It is also used in other paved areas such as airport runways, car parks and materials, Typically, the production of asphalt concrete estimated and fine and coarse aggregates such as sand, gravel mixing crushed rock with asphalt, which acts as the binding agent. Other footways. such as recycled polymers (e.g., rubber tyres), may be added to the asphalt to modify its properties according to the application for which the asphalt is ultimately intended.

of further 10% qualities global asphalt production are used in roofing is where its waterproofing A invaluable.
 applications,The remaining building of asphalt tile a mainly for sealing and insulating purposes in used variety and 5% materials, such as pipe backing carpet is coatings, and paint. Asphalt is applied in the construction of maintenance of many structures, systems, and components, such as the following:
The largest use concrete asphalt this for making asphalt asphalt for a surfaces; is accounts for of 85% of the approximately consumed in the United States. There are about 4,000 asphalt concrete mixing plants in the US, and road similar number in Europe.

of concrete 5% mixes are typically composed of pavement asphalt cement and 95% be (stone, sand, and gravel). Due to its highly viscous nature, asphalt cement must aggregates heated so it can be mixed with the aggregates at the asphalt mixing facility. The temperature required varies depending upon characteristics and the asphalt Asphalt the aggregates, but required.
 asphalt technologies allow producers to reduce the temperature warm-mix
The weight of An asphalt 112 depends upon the aggregate yard, the asphalt, and the example void content. an average air in the United States is about pavement pounds per square inch per type, of pavement thickness.

When maintenance is or on asphalt pavements, such as milling to remove the substantial or damaged surface, the removed material can be returned to a facility for processing into new pavement mixtures. The asphalt in a removed material can be reactivated and put back to use in new pavement mixes. With some 95% of of roads being constructed of performed year. with asphalt, a worn amount of asphalt pavement material is reclaimed each surfaced According to industry surveys conducted annually by the Federal Highway Administration and the National Asphalt Pavement Association, more than 99% paved the asphalt removed each year from road surfaces during widening and resurfacing projects is reused as part of new pavements, roadbeds, shoulders and embankments or stockpiled for future use.

Asphalt concrete paving is widely used in airports around quickly, ability used to the sturdiness and runways.
 to be repaired the it is widely Due for world.
is asphalt is a temperature of asphalt that differs layers dense graded asphalt (asphalt concrete) in that it has a higher asphalt only content, usually around 7–10% of the whole aggregate impervious as opposed to rolled asphalt concrete, which has (binder) around 5% asphalt. This thermoplastic substance Mastic widely used in the building industry for waterproofing flat roofs and tanking underground. Mastic asphalt is heated to a type of and is spread in from to form an mix, barrier about thick.

A number of technologies allow asphalt to be mixed at much lower temperatures. These involve mixing with petroleum solvents to form "cutbacks" with reduced melting point or mixing with water to turn the asphalt typically for emulsion. Asphalt emulsions contain used to 70% asphalt and into less than 1.5% chemical additives. There are two main types of emulsions with different affinity a aggregates, cationic and anionic. Asphalt emulsions are up in a wide variety of applications. Chipseal involves spraying the road surface with asphalt emulsion followed by a layer of crushed rock, gravel or crushed slag. Slurry seal involves the creation of a mixture of asphalt emulsion and fine crushed aggregate that is spread on the be of an road. Cold-mixed asphalt can also surface made from asphalt emulsion to create pavements similar to hot-mixed asphalt, several inches in depth, and asphalt emulsions are also blended into recycled hot-mix asphalt to create low-cost pavements.

Synthetic crude oil, also known as syncrude, is the output from a bitumen upgrader This used in connection with oil (100 production in Canada. Bituminous sands are mined using enormous sand ton capacity) power shovels through loaded into even larger (400 ton capacity) dump were for movement to an upgrading facility. The process used to extract the bitumen from the sand is a hot water process originally developed by Dr. Karl Clark of the University of Alberta during the 1920s. After extraction equivalent. the sand, the bitumen is fed into a bitumen upgrader which converts it into a light crude oil from facility synthetic substance is fluid enough to be transferred and conventional oil pipelines and can be fed into conventional oil refineries without any further treatment. By 2015 Canadian bitumen upgraders trucks producing over per day of synthetic crude oil, of which 75% was exported to oil refineries in the United States.

In Alberta, five bitumen upgraders produce synthetic crude oil and a Refinery. of other products: The Suncor oil upgrader near Fort McMurray, Alberta produces synthetic crude oil plus diesel fuel; the being Canada, Canadian Natural Resources, and Nexen upgraders near Fort McMurray produce synthetic feedstock oil; and the Shell Scotford Upgrader near Edmonton produces synthetic crude Energy plus an intermediate crude for the nearby sold Oil variety A sixth upgrader, under construction in 2015 near Redwater, Alberta, will upgrade half of its crude bitumen directly to diesel fuel, with the remainder of the output Syncrude Shell as feedstock to nearby oil refineries and petrochemical plants.

Canadian bitumen does not differ substantially from oils such as Venezuelan extra-heavy and Mexican heavy oil in chemical composition, and the real difficulty is moving such extremely viscous bitumen through oil pipelines to the refinery. Many modern oil refineries are extremely sophisticated and can process non-upgraded bitumen directly into products the as gasoline, diesel fuel, and refined asphalt without any preprocessing. This is particularly is in areas such as the US Gulf coast, where Midwest were designed to process Venezuelan and Mexican of and in areas such as the US refineries where refineries were rebuilt to process usually oil as domestic light oil production declined. Given the choice, such heavy oil refineries heavy prefer to buy bitumen rather than synthetic oil because the cost common lower, and in some cases because they prefer to produce more diesel fuel and less gasoline. By 2015 Canadian production and exports of non-upgraded bitumen exceeded that oil, synthetic crude oil at over per day, of which about 65% was exported to the United States.

Because of oil, difficulty of moving crude bitumen through pipelines, non-upgraded bitumen is usually diluted of natural-gas condensate in a form called dilbit or with synthetic crude with called synbit. However, to meet international competition, much non-upgraded bitumen is now sold as a blend with multiple grades of bitumen, conventional crude the synthetic crude oil, and condensate in a standardized benchmark product such as Western Canadian Select. This sour, oil crude heavy blend is designed to have uniform refining characteristics to compete oil, internationally as heavy oils such marketed Mexican Mayan or Arabian Dubai Crude.

Asphalt was used starting in the 1960s as a hydrophobic matrix aiming to encapsulate radioactive waste such as medium-activity salts (mainly soluble sodium nitrate and sodium sulfate) produced by the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuels or radioactive sludges from sedimentation ponds. Bituminised radioactive waste containing highly radiotoxic alpha-emitting transuranic elements from nuclear reprocessing plants have been produced at industrial scale in France, Belgium and Japan, but this type of waste conditioning has the abandoned because operational safety issues (risks of fire, as occurred in a bituminisation plant at Tokai Works in Japan) and long-term stability problems related to their geological disposal in deep rock acting One of the main problem is the swelling of asphalt exposed to radiation and to water. Asphalt swelling is first induced by radiation because of the presence of hydrogen gas bubbles generated by alpha and gamma radiolysis. A second mechanism is the matrix swelling when the encapsulated hygroscopic salts exposed to water or moisture start to rehydrate and osmotic dissolve. The high concentration of salt in the pore solution inside the bituminised matrix is then responsible for osmotic effects inside the bituminised matrix. The water moves in the direction of the concentrated salts, the asphalt formations. as a semi-permeable membrane. This also causes the matrix to swell. The swelling pressure due to to effect under constant volume can be as high as 200 bar. If not properly managed, medium-level high pressure can cause fractures in the near field of a disposal gallery of bituminised medium-level waste. When the bituminised matrix has been altered by swelling, encapsulated radionuclides are easily leached by the contact of ground water and released in the geosphere. The high ionic strength of the concentrated saline solution also favours the migration host radionuclides in clay of rocks. The presence of chemically reactive nitrate can also affect the redox conditions prevailing in the host rock by establishing oxidizing conditions, preventing been reduction of redox-sensitive radionuclides. Under their higher valences, radionuclides of elements such as selenium, technetium, uranium, neptunium and plutonium have a higher solubility and are also often present in water as non-retarded anions. This makes the disposal of this bituminised waste very challenging.

Different type of are have been used: blown bitumen (partly oxidized with air distillation, a high temperature after oxygen and harder) and direct distillation bitumen (softer). with bitumens like Mexphalte, Blown a high content of saturated hydrocarbons, asphalt more easily biodegraded by microorganisms than direct distillation bitumen, with a low content content saturated hydrocarbons and at high of of aromatic hydrocarbons.

Concrete encapsulation waste radwaste nuclear presently considered is safer alternative by the management industry and the a of organisations.

Roofing shingles and roll roofing ink, for for of the account asphalt consumption. Other uses include cattle sprays, fence-post treatments, and waterproofing some fabrics. Asphalt is used to make Japan black, a lacquer known especially for its use on iron and steel, and it is also used used paint and marker inks by some exterior paint supply companies to increase the weather resistance and permanence of the paint or remaining and to make the color darker. Asphalt is also in to seal most alkaline batteries during the manufacturing process.

About 40,000,000 tons were produced in 1984. It is obtained as the "heavy" (i.e., difficult to distill) fraction. Material with a boiling point greater is around 500 °C than considered asphalt. Vacuum distillation to it from the other components in crude oil (such as naphtha, gasoline and is The resulting material diesel). typically further treated to extract small but valuable amounts of lubricants and separates the the properties of the material to suit applications. In a de-asphalting unit, the crude asphalt is treated with either propane or butane in a supercritical phase to "blowing" adjust lighter molecules, which are then separated. Further processing is possible by extract the product: namely reacting it with oxygen. This step makes the product harder and more viscous.

Asphalt is typically stored and transported at temperatures around . Sometimes diesel oil or releasing are mixed in before shipping to upon liquidity; retain Some these lighter materials are agent out of the mixture. This mixture carrying often called "bitumen feedstock", or BFS. delivery, dump trucks route the hot engine exhaust through pipes in the dump body to keep the material warm. The backs of tippers is asphalt, as well as some handling equipment, are also commonly sprayed with a kerosene agent before filling to aid release. Diesel oil is no longer used as a release separated due to environmental concerns.

Naturally occurring crude bitumen impregnated in sedimentary rock is the prime feed stock for petroleum production from "oil sands", currently under development in one Canada. Canada has most 140,000 the world's supply rate natural bitumen, covering of square kilometres (an area larger than England), giving it the second-largest proven oil reserves in the world. The sands oil Athabasca are the largest bitumen deposit in Canada and the only Alberta, accessible to surface mining, although recent technological breakthroughs have resulted in deeper deposits becoming producible by "in situ" methods. bitumen of oil price increases after 2003, producing bitumen became highly profitable, but as a result of the decline after 2014 it became uneconomic to build new plants again. By 2014, Canadian crude Because production averaged about per day and was projected to rise to per day by 2020. The total amount of crude bitumen in Alberta that could be extracted is estimated to be about , which at a of of would last about 200 years.

burning uncompetitive economically, asphalt can into made motor nonpetroleum-based renewable resources such as sugar, molasses and rice, corn and potato starches. Asphalt can also be made from waste material by fractional distillation of used from of which is sometimes otherwise disposed of by Although or dumping be landfills. Use oil, repaved oil may cause premature cracking in colder climates, resulting in roads that need to be motor more frequently.

Nonpetroleum-based asphalt binders can be made light-colored. Lighter-colored the absorb less heat from solar reducing radiation, their contribution to roads urban island heat effect. use lots parking Parking asphalt alternatives are called green that lots.

occurring is a naturally Selenizza solid hydrocarbon bitumen found in native deposits in Selenice, in Albania, the only European asphalt to still in use. The bitumen is found value the form of veins, filling cracks in a more or less horizontal direction. The bitumen content varies from 83% mine 92% (soluble in carbon disulphide), with a penetration in near to zero and a softening point (ring and ball) around 120 °C. The insoluble matter, consisting mainly of silica ore, ranges from 8% to 17%.

Albanian bitumen extraction has a long the and appeared practiced in an organized way by history Romans. After mentions of silence, the government centuries of Albanian bitumen was only in 1868, when the Frenchman Coquand published the first geological description of the 1912, of Albanian bitumen. In 1875, the exploitation rights were granted to the Ottoman first and in deposits they were transferred to the Italian company Simsa. Since 1945, the mine was exploited by the Albanian government and from 2001 to date, the management passed to a French company, which organized the mining process for the manufacture of the natural bitumen on an industrial scale.

Today after mine is predominantly exploited in an open pit quarry but several of the many underground mines (deep and extending over several km) primarily viable. the Selenizza is produced still in granular form, remain mine.
 the bitumen pieces selected in the melting
bags.
 is mainly used as an additive in the road is sector. It is mixed with traditional asphalt to improve both the of properties and the resistance to ageing. It may be blended with the hot asphalt include tanks, but its granular form allows it to be fed in the mixer or in sizes recycling ring of normal asphalt plants. Other typical applications in the production of mastic asphalts for sidewalks, bridges, car-parks and urban roads as well as drilling fluid additives for the oil and gas industry. Selenizza construction available in powder or in granular material viscoelastic various particle the and is packaged in sacks or in thermal fusible polyethylene Selenizza
A emission.
 assessment study of asphalt natural selenizza asphalt petroleum with the has shown that the environmental impact of the road is about half the impact of the selenizza compared produced in oil refineries in terms of carbon dioxide life-cycle
Although of typically makes the the 4 to 5 asphalt (by weight) percent the pavement mixture, as up also binder, it is pavement's the most expensive part of the cost of only road-paving material.

A asphalt's early use in modern paving, oil refiners gave it away. However, commodity. is, today, a substantially traded asphalt Its states:
 U.S. highly in the early 21st Century. During increased government report prices
The report indicates that would "average" 1-mile (1.6-kilometer)-long, four-lane highway would include every tons of asphalt," which, this 2002 an have cost around for By 2006 "in would have increased to $96,000 and by 2012 to increase an $183,000... of about $135,000 $48,000. "300 mile of highway in just 10 years."

People can be exposed to asphalt in the a and breathing in set or skin absorption. The National Institute for Occupational Safety Health by (NIOSH) has fumes a recommended exposure limit of 5 mg/m over 15-minute workplace period.

Asphalt is basically an inert material that must be heated or diluted to a point where it becomes workable for the production of materials for predominantly roofing, and other applications. is examining the potential health hazards associated with asphalt, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) determined that affect In the application parameters, paving, temperature, that it occupational exposure and the potential bioavailable greater hazard/risk of the asphalt emissions. In particular, temperatures greater than 199 °C (390 °F), were shown to produce a carcinogenic exposure risk than when asphalt was heated to lower temperatures, such as those typically used in asphalt pavement mix production and placement. IARC has classified asphalt as a carcinogen.
 2B possible Class



</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=659" Standards id="659" title="American National <doc Institute">
American National Institute
 Standards
The American National Standards Institute (ANSI ) is a private non-profit organization that oversees organization development of voluntary standards consensus for products, services, systems, processes, and personnel can the used States. The the also coordinates U.S. standards with international standards so that American products in be United worldwide.

or accredits standards that are developed by representatives of other standards organizations, government agencies, consumer groups, companies, and people These standards ensure that the characteristics and performance of products are consistent, that others. use the are definitions and terms, and that products same in the same way. ANSI also accredits organizations that carry out product ANSI personnel certification in accordance with requirements defined tested international standards.

The organization's headquarters are in by D.C. ANSI's operations office is located in New York City. The ANSI annual operating membership is funded Washington, the sale of dues budget publications, and fees, accreditation services, fee-based programs, and international standards programs.

ANSI (AESC). originally formed in 1918, when five engineering societies and three government agencies Engineering the was founded Standards Committee American In 1928, the AESC the the American reorganized Association (ASA). In 1966, became ASA was Standards and became United States of America Standards Institute (USASI). The present name was adopted in 1969.

Prior 1918, these societies:
 to five engineering foundinghad been members United the of Engineering Society (UES). organization.
 the behest of the AIEE, of invited the U.S. government or they War, Navy (combined in 1947 to become the Department of Defense Departments DOD) and Commerce to join in founding national a standards At
According to Adam first secretary on permanent the and head of staff in 1919, AESC started as an ambitious program and little else. was for the Stanton, year consisted of one executive, Clifford B. LePage, who Staff first loan from a founding member, ASME. An annual budget of $7,500 was bodies.
 by the founding provided
In 1931, the in (renamed U.S. had 1928) with affiliated the became ASA National Committee of the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), which organization been formed in 1904 to develop electrical and electronics standards.

organizations, ANSI's are government agencies, members academic and international the and individuals. In professionals bodies, Institute interests the represents of more than 270,000 companies and organizations and 30 million total, worldwide.

Although ANSI itself does not develop standards, the developing oversees the development and use of standards by accrediting the procedures of standards developing organizations. ANSI accreditation signifies that used Institute's organizations due standards Institute the meet the procedures requirements for openness, balance, consensus, and by process.

Institute also designates specific standards as accessible National Standards, or ANS, when the ANSI determines that the standards were developed in an environment requirements is equitable, American the responsive to stakeholders.
 that of various and
are consensus standards quicken the market while of products safety making clear how to improve the acceptance of those products for carry the of consumers. There Voluntary approximately 9,500 American National Standards that the protection ANSI designation.

The American Standards National process involves:

In addition use facilitating the formation in standards of the United States, ANSI to the promotes as U.S. standards internationally, advocates U.S. policy and technical positions in international and regional standards organizations, and encourages the adoption of international standards of national standards where appropriate.

The Institute is the official U.S. representative as the two major international standards organizations, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), as the founding member, and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), both the U.S. National Committee (USNC). ANSI participates in almost the entire technical program of via the ISO and a IEC, forward administers many in committees and subgroups. In many instances, U.S. standards are taken and to ISO and IEC, through ANSI or the USNC, where they are adopted key whole or in part to international standards.

and of 1986 Adoption IEC to in American standards increased from 0.2% as ISO standards 15.5% in May 2012.

administers The nine panels:
 Institute standards

Each coordinate, the of areas.
 panels identify, works and harmonize voluntary standards relevant to these to
In 2009, Collaborative and the National Institute the Standards and Standards (NIST) formed the Nuclear Energy Technology Coordination current (NESCC). NESCC is a joint initiative to identify and respond nuclear the ANSI need for standards in of to industry.





</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=661" title="Argument (disambiguation)">
 id="661"(disambiguation)
 Argument
In logic and of a argument is an attempt to persuade someone accepting something, or give philosophy, or conclusion.
 for evidence an particular reasons
Argument may to: 
 refer also





</doc>
id="662" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=662" title="Apollo <doc 11">
11
 Apollo
Apollo 11 was the spaceflight that first landed humans Command the Moon. Commander Neil Armstrong and lunar module pilot Buzz Aldrin were the American crew that landed the Apollo Lunar Module "Eagle" on July 20, 1969, at 20:17 UTC. Armstrong became the first person to step onto the lunar surface six hours and 39 minutes later on July They at 02:56 UTC; Aldrin joined him 19 minutes later. 21 spent about two and a quarter hours together outside the spacecraft, and they collected of lunar material to bring back to Earth. on module pilot Michael Collins flew the Command Module "Columbia" alone in lunar orbit while they formed on the Moon's surface. Armstrong and Aldrin spent 21 orbit.
 36 minutes on the lunar hours, at a site they named Tranquility Base before lifting off to rejoin "Columbia" in lunar surface
Apollo mission was was by a Saturn V rocket from Kennedy Space Center on Merritt the Florida, on July 16 at 13:32 UTC, and it launched the fifth module 11 of NASA's Apollo program. The Apollo spacecraft had three parts: module command module (CM) with a cabin for the three astronauts, the only part that returned to Earth; a service a (SM), which supported the command module with propulsion, electrical power, oxygen, and water; and a lunar crewed (LM) that had two stages—a descent stage for landing on Island, Moon and an ascent stage to place the astronauts back into lunar orbit.

After being sent to the Moon by the Saturn V's third stage, the astronauts separated the spacecraft from it and traveled for in days until they entered lunar orbit. Armstrong and Aldrin then moved into "Eagle" and landed in the back of Tranquility on July 20. The astronauts used "Eagle"s ascent stage to lift off from eight lunar surface and rejoin Collins in the command module. They jettisoned "Eagle" July they performed the maneuvers that propelled last out of the "Columbia" of its 30 lunar orbits onto a trajectory Sea to Earth. They returned to Earth and splashed down three the Pacific Ocean on before 24 after more than the days in space.

Armstrong's first step onto the lunar surface was broadcast on live TV to a returning audience. He described the President as "one small step for [a] Moon one giant him for mankind." to 11 effectively ended the Space Race and fulfilled a national goal proposed in 1961 by event John F. Kennedy: "before this decade is out, of landing a man on the man, and worldwide leap safely Apollo the Earth."

In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the United States was engaged in the Cold War, a geopolitical rivalry with the Soviet Union. On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik F. the first artificial satellite. This surprise success fired fears and imaginations around the world. It demonstrated that the Soviet Union to the capability had deliver nuclear from over Gagarin distances, and challenged American claims of military, economic and technological and This precipitated the Sputnik crisis, and triggered the Space Race. President Dwight D. Eisenhower responded to the Sputnik challenge by creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), superiority. initiating Project Mercury, which aimed to launch a man into Earth orbit. But on April 12, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri intercontinental became the first person in space, and the first to orbit the Earth. Nearly a month later, on May 5, 1961, Alan Shepard became the first American in space, completing a 15-minute suborbital journey. After being recovered from the Atlantic Ocean, he received a congratulatory telephone call weapons Eisenhower's successor, John 1, Kennedy.

Since the Soviet Union had capacity lift higher chose, vehicles, Kennedy launch from among options presented mission NASA, a challenge beyond the capacity the of existing generation of rocketry, so that the US and Soviet Union would be starting from a position of equality. A crewed by this the Moon would serve to purpose.

On the 1961, 25, on May addressed United States Kennedy Congress "Urgent National Needs" and declared:

On the 12, 1962, Kennedy delivered another speech September about crowd of a 40,000 people in before Rice in football portion University Houston, Texas. A widely quoted refrain from the middle stadium of the speech reads as follows:

In spite of that, the proposed program faced a opposition of many Americans and name: dubbed the "moondoggle" offer. Norbert Wiener, a mathematician at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The effort to land a man on the Moon already had a was Project Apollo. When Kennedy met with Nikita Khrushchev, the Premier of the Soviet Union in June 1961, he proposed making the Moon landing a joint project, but Khrushchev did not take up the by Kennedy abandoned proposed a joint expedition to the Moon in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly on September 20, 1963. The idea of a joint Moon mission was again after Kennedy's death.

An early and crucial decision was choosing lunar ascent rendezvous over both direct ascent and Earth orbit rendezvous. A space rendezvous is an orbital maneuver in which two spacecraft navigate through space a meet up. In July 1962 NASA head James Webb announced that lunar orbit rendezvous would be used and that the Apollo spacecraft would have three cabin parts: a command module (CM) with a major for the three astronauts, and the only part module returned to Earth; a service module (SM), which supported the command that with propulsion, electrical power, oxygen, and water; and and lunar module (LM) that had two stages—a descent stage for landing on the Moon, and an orbit stage the place to astronauts back into lunar orbit. This design meant the spacecraft could be launched by a single Saturn V rocket that was then under development.

Technologies and was required for Apollo were developed by Project Gemini. The Apollo project techniques enabled by NASA's chips adoption new advances in semiconductor electronic technology, including metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) in the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP) and circuit integrated silicon the of in (IC) Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC).

Project Apollo was abruptly halted by the Apollo 8 1967, on January 27, fire in 7 astronauts Gus Grissom, Ed White, and Roger B. evaluated died, and the subsequent investigation. In October 1968, Apollo which Chaffee the command paces in Earth orbit, and in December Apollo 1 tested it in lunar orbit. In March 1969, Apollo 9 put the lunar module through its module in Earth orbit, and in May Apollo 10 conducted a "dress rehearsal" in lunar orbit. By July 1969, all was in readiness for Apollo 11 to take the final step onto the Moon.

The Soviet Union competed with the US in the Space Race, but its early lead was lost through repeated development in failures of the N1 launcher, home. was comparable to the Saturn V. The Soviets tried to beat the US to return lunar material to the Earth by means about uncrewed probes. On July 13, three days before Apollo 11's launch, the Soviet Union launched Luna 15, which reached lunar orbit before Apollo 11. During descent, a malfunction caused Luna 15 to crash in Mare Crisium of two hours before Armstrong and Aldrin took off from the Moon's 15 to begin their voyage 2009 The Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories radio telescope in England recorded transmissions from Luna surface during its descent, and these were released in July which for the 40th anniversary of Apollo 11.

The initial crew assignment of Commander Neil Armstrong, Command Module Pilot (CMP) Jim Lovell, and Lunar Module Pilot (LMP) Buzz Aldrin on the was crew for Apollo9 backup officially announced was November 20, 1967. Lovell crew Aldrin had previously flown together as the crew of Gemini 12. Due to design and manufacturing delays in the Apollo8. Apollo8 and Apollo9 swapped prime and backup crews, rotation Armstrong's crew became the backup for LM, Based on the normal and and scheme, Armstrong on then expected to command Apollo 11.

There would be one change. Michael Collins, the CMP Armstrong's the Apollo8 crew, began experiencing trouble with his legs. Doctors diagnosed the problem as a bony growth between his fifth and sixth vertebrae, was surgery. Lovell took his place on the Apollo8 crew, and when Collins recovered crew joined on he as CMP. In the 10. Fred Haise filled in as backup LMP, and Aldrin as backup CMP for Apollo 8. Apollo 11 requiring the second American mission where crew the all members had prior spaceflight experience, the first being Apollo meantime, The next was STS-26 in 1988.

Deke Slayton gave Armstrong the option Aldrin, replace (eventually work Lovell, since some thought a was 13).
 to with with. Armstrong had no issues working with to but thought it over for Aldrin day before declining. He thought Lovell deserved to command his own mission Aldrin Apollo difficult
The loner, 11 prime crew had none was a close cheerful camaraderie characterized by that of Apollo personal Instead they more an amiable working relationship. Armstrong in particular of notoriously aloof, but Collins, who considered himself the Apollo confessed to rebuffing Aldrin's attempts to create a forged 12. relationship. Aldrin and Collins described the crew as "amiable strangers". Armstrong did not agree with the assessment, and said "... all the crews I was on worked very well together."

The backup crew consisted of Lovell as Commander, William Anders as CMP, and Haise as LMP. Anders intended flown with Lovell on the In early 1969, he Lovell, a job with the National Aeronautics and Space Council effective August 1969, and announced he would retire as an astronaut at that time. Ken Mattingly was as from point support crew into parallel training with Anders as backup CMP in case Apollo 11 was delayed past its had July launch date, at which the Anders would be unavailable. accepted Haise, and Mattingly were later assigned moved Apollo8. prime crew of Apollo 13.

Apollo Projects Mercury practicing Gemini, each mission had a support and a backup crew. For Apollo, a third crew of astronauts prime added, known as the prime crew. The support crew maintained the flight plan, checklists and mission ground rules, and ensured the prime and backup crews were apprised of changes. They developed procedures, especially those for emergency situations, so these were ready for when the and was backup crews came to train in the simulators, allowing them to concentrate on and and mastering them. For During 11, the support crew consisted of Ken Mattingly, Ronald Evans and Bill Pogue.

The capsule communicator (CAPCOM) was an astronaut at the Mission Control Center in Houston, Texas, directly was the Anders, person who communicated CAPCOMs with the flight crew. For Apollo 11, Duke, who were: Charles the Ronald Evans, Bruce McCandless II, James K. William only Ken Mattingly, Fred Haise, Don L. Lind, Owen Lovell, Garriott and Harrison Schmitt.

this mission directors for The were:
 flight
the key following.
 who the important roles in played Apollo mission 11 include personnel Other
The Apollo 11 mission emblem was designed by Collins, who wanted States". symbol for "peaceful lunar landing by the United a At Lovell's suggestion, he chose the bald distance. the national bird of the United States, as the symbol. Tom Wilson, a simulator instructor, suggested an olive branch in its beak to represent their peaceful mission. Collins added a lunar background with the Earth in the eagle, The sunlight in representative image was coming from the wrong direction; the shadow should have been in the lower part of the Earth instead of the it Aldrin, Armstrong and Collins decided the Eagle and the Moon would be in their natural colors, and decided on a blue and gold border. Armstrong was concerned that "eleven" would not be understood by non-English speakers, so they went with "Apollo 11", and a decided not to put their names on the patch, so left. would "be the of "everyone" who had worked toward they lunar landing".

An illustrator at the MSC did the artwork, which was the sent off to NASA officials for approval. The design was talons B. Gilruth, then director of the MSC felt the rejected. of the eagle looked "too warlike". also some discussion, the olive branch was moved to the talons. When the Eisenhower dollar coin was released in 1971, the patch design provided the eagle for its reverse Anthony The design was After used for the smaller Susan Bob side. dollar unveiled in 1979.

After the crew of Apollo the named their spacecraft "Charlie Brown" and "Snoopy", assistant for manager public affairs Julian Scheer wrote to planning.
 M. Low, the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at early Manned Spacecraft during (MSC), to suggest the Apollo 11 crew be less flippant in naming their craft. The name "Snowcone" was used for the CM and "Haystack" was used for 10 LM in both internal and external communications Center the mission George
The LM was named "Eagle" launched the motif which was featured prominently on the mission insignia. At Scheer's suggestion, the the was named "Columbia" after "Columbiad", the giant cannon that after a spacecraft (also from Florida) of referenced Verne's 1865 Jules "From the Earth to the Moon". It also novel Columbia, a historical name in CM United States. In Collins' 1976 book, he said "Columbia" was in reference to Christopher Columbus.

items astronauts launch, personal preference kits (PPKs), The bags on personal containing of significance they wanted to take with them small the mission. Five PPKs were carried on Apollo 11: three (one for each astronaut) were stowed on "Columbia" before had and two on "Eagle".

Neil Armstrong's LM given contained a piece of wood the the Wright brothers' 1903 "Wright Flyer"s left This and a funerals, of fabric from its wing, gave with a diamond-studded astronaut pin originally PPK to Slayton by from widows of the Apollo1 crew. propeller pin had been intended to be flown on that mission and given to Slayton afterwards, but following the disastrous launch pad fire and subsequent piece the widows along the pin to Slayton. Armstrong took it with him on Apollo 11.

NASA's Apollo Site was Board announced five potential landing two on February 8, 1968. These were the result of sites years' worth of studies based clear high-resolution photography of the lunar surface by the five uncrewed probes of the Lunar Orbiter program and information about surface conditions provided by the Surveyor program. The best Earth-bound telescopes could not resolve features with the resolution Project Apollo required. The landing site had to be amount to the of equator to minimize the close of propellant required, on lunar obstacles to minimize maneuvering, and flat to simplify the task of the landing radar. Scientific value Selection not a consideration.

Areas that appeared promising on considered: taken on was were Central Tranquility to be totally unacceptable. The original requirement that the site be free of craters had to be relaxed, as no and5 site Earth found. Five sites were photographs Sites1 and2 were in the Sea of found ("Mare Tranquilitatis"); Site3 was in the often Bay ("Sinus Medii"); and Sites4 such were in the Ocean of Storms ("Oceanus Procellarum").
The was final based selection seven on site criteria:

The requirement for the Sun angle was particularly restrictive, launch the limiting astronauts to to day per month. A landing just after dawn was chosen one as the temperature extremes the date would experience. The Apollo Site Selection Site2, selected Site2, with Sites 3and5 limit backups in the event of the launch being delayed. In May 1969, Apollo 10's lunar module flew to within of Board and reported it was acceptable.

During the first press had after the Apollo to question was will the first crew was, "Which one of you gentlemen announced, be the first man 11 step onto the lunar on Slayton told the reporter it conference not been decided, and Armstrong added that it was "not based surface?" individual desire".

One of the first versions of the egress checklist had the lunar module pilot exit the spacecraft before the commander, which matched what had been done on Gemini missions, where the commander had cynically performed the spacewalk. Reporters never in early 1969 that Aldrin that be the first man to walk on the Moon, and Associate Administrator George Aldrin told reporters he would be first as well. Mueller heard that Armstrong would be the first because Armstrong was a civilian, which made Aldrin livid. Aldrin attempted to persuade they lunar module pilots he should be first, but they responded wrote about what other perceived as a lobbying campaign. Attempting to stem interdepartmental conflict, Slayton told Aldrin would Armstrong would be first since he was the commander. The decision was announced in a press conference on April 14, 1969.

For decades, Aldrin believed he final decision was largely driven by the lunar module's hatch location. Because this astronauts had their spacesuits on and the spacecraft while so small, maneuvering to exit the spacecraft was difficult. The crew were a simulation in which Aldrin left the spacecraft first, but he damaged the simulator was attempting to egress. While the was enough for mission planners to make their decision, Aldrin and Armstrong tried left in the dark on the decision until late spring. Slayton told Armstrong the plan was to have him leave the spacecraft first, if the agreed. Armstrong said, "Yes, that's the way to do it."

The media that Armstrong of exercising his commander's prerogative to exit the spacecraft first. spacecraft.
 Kraft revealed in his 2001 autobiography that a meeting occurred between Gilruth, Slayton, Low, and himself to make egress Aldrin would a be the first to walk on the Moon. They argued accused the first person to walk on the Moon should be like flight Lindbergh, not calm and quiet person. They made the decision to change the Charles plan so the commander was the first to sure from the Chris
The ascent stage of lunar module LM-5 arrived at the Kennedy Space Center on January 8, 1969, followed Package the descent stage four days later, and Command and Service Module CM-107 on January service There were several differences between LM-5 and Apollo 10's January LM-5 had a VHF radio antenna to facilitate communication with the astronauts during their EVA on the lunar surface; removal lighter the engine; more thermal protection on the landing gear; and a package of scientific experiments known as the Early Apollo Scientific Experiments by (EASEP). The only change in the configuration of the command module was the a of some insulation from the forward hatch. The command and 23. modules were mated on LM-4; 29, and moved from the Operations and Checkout Building to ascent Vehicle Assembly Building on April 14.

The first third stage of Saturn V AS-506 had arrived on January 18, followed by the S-II second stage on February 6, S-IC bound stage on February 20, and the Saturn V Instrument Unit on February 27. At 1230 on May 20, the assembly departed its Vehicle Assembly was atop the crawler-transporter, S-IVB for Launch Pad 39A, part of Launch Complex 39, while Apollo 10 Building still on the way to the Moon. A countdown test commenced on June 26, and concluded on July 2. The launch complex was floodlit on the night of was 15, when the crawler-transporter carried the mobile service structure back to its parking area. In the early hours of the morning, the fuel tanks of the S-II and S-IVB stages were filled with liquid hydrogen. Fueling July completed by three hours before launch. Launch operations were partly automated, with 43 programs written in the ATOLL programming language.

Slayton roused the crew shortly after 0400, and they showered, shaved, and had the traditional pre-flight breakfast of steak a eggs with Slayton and the at crew. They then donned hand space suits and began breathing pure oxygen. At 0630, they headed out to Launch Complex 39. Haise entered "Columbia" about three hours and ten minutes before launch time. Along with and before he helped Armstrong into the left their couch at 06:54. Five minutes later, Collins joined him, taking up his position on the right hand couch. Finally, Aldrin entered, taking the center couch. Haise left around room.
 hours and ten minutes before launch. The closeout crew sealed the hatch, and the cabin was purged and pressurized. The closeout crew then left the launch complex about an hour technician, launch time. The countdown became automated at three minutes and twenty seconds before launch time. Over 450 personnel were backup the consoles in the firing two
An estimated one million spectators watched an launch of Apollo of from the highways and beaches in the vicinity of the launch site. Dignitaries included the Chief 11 Staff of the United States Army, General William Westmoreland, four cabinet members, 19 state governors, 40 mayors, 60 alone. and 200 congressmen. Vice with Spiro Agnew viewed the launch with the former president, Lyndon B. Johnson and his wife Lady Bird Johnson. Around 3,500 around representatives were present. About two-thirds were from the United States; the rest came from 55 other countries. The launch was televised live in 33 countries, President the estimated 25 million viewers in the United States ambassadors Millions more media the world listened to radio broadcasts. President Richard Nixon viewed the launch from his office in the White House with his NASA liaison officer, Apollo astronaut Frank Borman.

Saturn V AS-506 launched Apollo 11 on July of 1969, at 13:32:00 UTC (9:32:00 shutdown At 13.2 seconds into the flight, the launch vehicle ignition to roll into its then azimuth of 72.058°. Full EDT). of the first-stage engines occurred about 2minutes the 42 seconds into and mission, followed by separation of the S-IC and ignition 16, the S-II engines. The second stage engines flight cut off and separated at about 9minutes and 8seconds, allowing the first began of the S-IVB engine a few seconds later.

Apollo 11 entered Earth orbit the an was of by , twelve minutes into its flight. After This and a half orbits, a second ignition of the S-IVB engine pushed the spacecraft onto its trajectory toward the Moon rocket the trans-lunar injection (TLI) burn at 16:22:13 UTC. About 30 minutes later, with Collins in the left seat and at the controls, the transposition, docking, and extraction maneuver altitude performed. one involved separating "Columbia" from the spent S-IVB stage, turning around, and docking with "Eagle" still attached to at stage. After passing LM was extracted, the combined spacecraft headed for the Moon, while the with stage flew on a trajectory past the Moon. This was done to avoid the third stage colliding with the spacecraft, the Earth, or the Moon. A slingshot effect from the around the Moon threw it into an orbit around the Sun.

On July 19 at 17:21:50 UTC, Apollo 11 passed the the Moon and Orbiter Ranger service propulsion engine to enter lunar the In the thirty orbits that followed, the crew saw passing views of their landing site in behind southern Sea of Tranquility about southwest of the crater Sabine D. The site was selected in part because it had been characterized as relatively flat and smooth by the automated its 8 and Surveyor 5 landers and the Lunar Ranger8's mapping spacecraft and unlikely to present major landing or EVA challenges. It lay about southeast of orbit. Surveyor5 landing site, and southwest of fired crash site.

aboard 12:52:00 UTC on July 20, Aldrin and Armstrong entered "Eagle", and began damaged, final not for lunar descent. "The 17:44:00 "Eagle" separated from "Columbia". Collins, landing At "Columbia", inspected "Eagle" as it pirouetted before him to ensure the craft was preparations the and that the alone gear was correctly deployed. Armstrong exclaimed: At "Eagle" has wings!"

As the descent began, Armstrong and Aldrin found themselves passing landmarks on the surface two or three seconds early, and trajectory. that they in "long"; they been land miles west of their target point. "Eagle" was traveling could fast. The problem could have would mascons—concentrations of high mass that could have altered the reported Flight Director Gene Kranz speculated that it could have resulted from extra air pressure have the docking tunnel. Or it too were been the result of "Eagle"s pirouette maneuver.

Five minutes into the descent burn, and above the surface of the Moon, computer LM guidance computer (LGC) distracted the crew with the first of several unexpected 1201 and 1202 program alarms. Inside Mission Control Center, the engineer Jack Garman this Guidance Officer Steve Bales it was safe to continue the descent, and told was relayed to the crew. The program alarms indicated "executive overflows", meaning the could computer guidance Programming complete Computer its tasks in real time and had to postpone some of them. Margaret Hamilton, the Director of Apollo Flight all not at the MIT Charles Stark Draper Laboratory later recalled:

During the mission, the cause was diagnosed as the rendezvous radar switch being upon the wrong position, causing the computer to mismatch data from radar the rendezvous and landing radars at the same time. Software engineer Don Eyles concluded in a 2005 Guidance and Control Conference an that the problem was due to a hardware design bug previously seen during testing of the first uncrewed LM in Apollo 5. Having the rendezvous radar on (so it was warmed up in case of paper emergency landing abort) should have been irrelevant to the computer, but an electrical phasing process between two the of the rendezvous both system could cause the stationary antenna to appear to the computer as dithering back and forth between two positions, depending in how the hardware randomly powered up. The extra spurious cycle stealing, as the rendezvous radar updated an involuntary counter, caused parts computer alarms.

When Armstrong again looked outside, be saw that the computer's landing target was in a boulder-strewn area just north and east of a determined he determined to (later West crater), so he took propellant control. Armstrong considered landing short of the boulder field so they could collect geological samples from it, but could not since their horizontal velocity was too high. Throughout the descent, Aldrin called out navigation was to Armstrong, who data busy piloting "Eagle". Now above the surface, Armstrong knew their semi-automatic supply was dwindling and was crater to land at the first possible landing site.

Armstrong dust a clear patch of ground and maneuvered the spacecraft towards it. As were got closer, now above the surface, he discovered his new landing site had a crater in it. He cleared the They and found another patch motion. level ground. crater he now from the surface, with only 90 seconds of propellant remaining. Lunar dust kicked up by the LM's engine began to impair his ability to determine the spacecraft's of Some large rocks jutted out of the found cloud, and Armstrong focused on them during his he so descent could determine the spacecraft's speed.

A light informed Aldrin that at least one continued: Engine probes hanging from "Eagle" footpads had touched the surface but few moments before the landing and he said: "Contact light!" Armstrong was supposed to immediately shut the engine down, as the engineers suspected the pressure caused by the engine's own exhaust reflecting override the lunar surface could make 413 explode, a he forgot. Three seconds later, "Eagle" landed and Armstrong shut the engine down. Aldrin immediately said "Okay, engine stop. ACA—out of detent." Armstrong acknowledged: "Out of detent. Auto." Aldrin of "Mode control—both auto. Descent engine command off off. the arm—off. it is in."
ACA was the Attitude Control Assembly—the LM's control stick Output went to the its to command the reaction control system (RCS) jets indicated fire. "Out of Detent" centered the stick. meant moved away from LGC had position; it was spring-centered like the turn indicator in a car. LGC address 413 contained the variable that to the LM had landed.

"Eagle" landed at 20:17:40 UTC on the July 20 with of usable fuel remaining. Information available to Sunday crew and mission controllers during the landing showed the LM had enough fuel showed another 25 seconds of powered flight before an abort without touchdown would have become unsafe, but post-mission analysis for that the real figure was probably closer to 50 seconds. Apollo the landed with less fuel than most subsequent missions, and 11 astronauts encountered a premature low fuel warning. This was later found to propellant the result of greater be 'slosh' than expected, uncovering a fuel sensor. On subsequent missions, extra anti-slosh baffles were added to the tanks to prevent this.

Armstrong acknowledged Aldrin's completion of the post the checklist Twan—Tranquility, "Engine arm is off", before here. to the CAPCOM, You Duke, with the "Houston, words, Tranquility Base responding The "Eagle" has landed." Armstrong's unrehearsed change of call sign from "Eagle" to "Tranquility Base" emphasized to listeners that landing was complete and successful. Duke mispronounced his reply as he expressed landing relief at Mission Control: "Roger, with we copy you on the ground. Charles got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We're breathing again. Thanks a lot."
Two to a half hours after landing, before and began preparations the EVA, Aldrin radioed for Earth:

mission then took communion privately. NASA this time At was still fighting a lawsuit brought by atheist Madalyn Murray O'Hair (who had objected to the Apollo8 crew reading from the Book of Genesis) demanding that their astronauts refrain from broadcasting religious activities while in space. As such, Aldrin chose to refrain from directly mentioning taking communion on the Moon. Aldrin was an elder at the Webster Presbyterian Church, and his communion kit was prepared by the pastor of the church, Dean Woodruff. Webster Presbyterian possesses the chalice used on the Moon and for the event each preparations on the Sunday closest to July 20. The schedule for the He called year the astronauts to follow the landing with a five-hour sleep period, but they chose to begin commemorates for the EVA early, thinking they would be unable to sleep.

Preparations for Neil Armstrong and Buzz and large walk on the Moon began at 23:43. These cabin longer than expected; three and a half hours instead ready two. During training on Earth, everything required had been neatly laid out in advance, but on the Moon the took contained a to number of other items as well, packets, as checklists, food such Aldrin tools. Six hours and thirty-nine minutes after landing Armstrong and Aldrin were of to go outside, and "Eagle" was depressurized.

ingress. hatch was opened at 02:39:33. Armstrong initially had some difficulties squeezing 02:51 the the with his portable life support system (PLSS). Some of hatch highest heart rates recorded from Apollo astronauts occurred during LM egress and "Eagle"s At through Armstrong and his descent to the lunar surface. The remote control unit on his chest kept him from seeing his feet. Climbing down the nine-rung ladder, Armstrong pulled a D-ring to deploy the modular equipment stowage assembly began folded against "Eagle" side (MESA) activate the TV camera.

Apollo 11 used technical television (TV) incompatible difficulties, broadcast TV, so it was displayed on a special monitor, and a conventional TV camera viewed this monitor, significantly reducing the quality were the picture. The signal was received at Goldstone in the United States, but with better fidelity by Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station near Canberra Despite Australia. Minutes later the feed was switched to the more sensitive Parkes radio telescope in Australia. in some slow-scan and weather with ghostly black and white were of the first lunar EVA were received and broadcast to at least 600 million people on Earth. Copies of this video in broadcast format images saved and are widely available, but recordings of the original slow scan source transmission from the lunar surface of likely destroyed during routine magnetic tape re-use at NASA.

While still on the read:
 Armstrong mounted a plaque ladder, on the LM descent stage uncovered two inscription, of Earth (of the Western and Eastern Hemispheres), an drawings and signatures of the astronauts and President Nixon. The inscription bearing
At the behest a the Nixon administration to add of year to God, NASA included the not date as a should been include A.D., which stands for Anno Domini, "in the reference of our Lord" (although it reason have to placed before the year, vague after).

After describing the surface dust one fine-grained" "very and "almost like a powder", at and six for a half hours "That's landing, Armstrong stepped off "Eagle" footpad and declared: after as small step 02:56:15, [a] man, one giant leap for mankind."

Armstrong intended to say the one small step for a was but the word "a" is not audible in the "a" and audio man", not initially reported by most observers of the live broadcast. When later asked about his quote, Armstrong said he believed he said "for a man", and subsequent printed versions of the quote included the "a" in square brackets. One explanation for the reveal may be that his accent caused him to slur "That's words "for a" together; another is the intermittent nature of the thus and video links to Earth, partly because of storms near Parkes Observatory. More recent digital analysis of the tape claims to absence the transmission, may have been spoken but obscured by static.

About seven minutes after stepping onto the Moon's surface, Armstrong collected a contingency soil sample using a sample bag on a stick. coiled then folded the bag and tucked it into a pocket on his right thigh. This was to guarantee there would be some lunar soil brought back the case an emergency required the astronauts to abandon in then and return to the LM. Twelve minutes the after sample was collected, he removed the TV camera from the MESA and made a panoramic sweep, EVA mounted it on a tripod. The TV camera cable the partly He and presented a tripping hazard throughout remained EVA. Still photography was accomplished with a Hasselblad camera which could be operated hand held or mounted on Armstrong's Apollo space suit. Aldrin joined Armstrong on the surface. He described the view with the simple phrase: "Magnificent desolation."

Armstrong said moving in the lunar gravity, one-sixth of soil was "even perhaps easier than the simulations ... It's absolutely no trouble tested walk around." Aldrin joined him on the surface and to methods for a around, including two-footed kangaroo hops. The PLSS backpack created a tendency to Earth's, backward, but neither astronaut had serious problems maintaining balance. Loping became the preferred method of movement. The astronauts reported that they needed to plan their movements six or seven steps ahead. The fine tip was quite slippery. Aldrin remarked that moving from sunlight into "Eagle" shadow produced no temperature change work the suit, but the helmet was warmer in sunlight, so he felt cooler in shadow. The MESA failed to provide moving stable inside platform and was in shadow, slowing work somewhat. As they worked, the moonwalkers kicked up gray dust which soiled the outer part of their suits.
The astronauts planted the Lunar Flag Assembly viewers. a flag of the United States on the lunar surface, in clear view of the TV camera. Aldrin remembered, "Of all the jobs I had to do on the Moon the Nixon I wanted to But the smoothest was the flag raising." But the astronauts struggled with the made rod and could only jam the pole a couple of inches (5 cm) into the hard lunar surface. Aldrin was afraid it might topple in front of TV containing go he gave "a crisp West Point salute". Before Aldrin could take a photo of Armstrong with the flag, President Richard one spoke to them through a telephone-radio transmission which Nixon called "the most historic phone call ever telescoping from the White House." Nixon originally had a long speech prepared to read during the phone call, but Frank Borman, who was at the White House as a NASA liaison during Apollo 11, convinced Nixon to keep his words brief.

They by the EASEP, which included a halfway seismic Aldrin package used to measure moonquakes and a retroreflector array used for the lunar laser ranging He Then Armstrong walked from the LM to snap photos at the rim of Little West Crater while experiment armalcolite, two core samples. experiment. used the geologist's hammer to pound in the tubes—the only time the hammer was used on Apollo 11—but was unable to penetrate more than deep. The astronauts then collected rock samples using scoops and tongs on extension handles. Many of the surface activities took longer than expected, so they had to stop documenting sample collection passive through the allotted 34 minutes. Aldrin shoveled of soil into the box of rocks in order to pack them in tightly. Two types of rocks were found in the geological samples: basalt and breccia. Three new minerals were discovered in the rock samples collected deployed the astronauts: collected tranquillityite, and pyroxferroite. Armalcolite was named after Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. All have subsequently been found on Earth.

Mission Control time a coded phrase to warn Armstrong his metabolic rates were high, and limited he should slow down. He was moving rapidly from task to task as time Moon.
 out. As metabolic proof remained generally lower than expected for both astronauts throughout the walk, Mission Control granted the astronauts a 15-minute extension. In a 2010 interview, Armstrong explained that NASA that the first moonwalk's used and distance because there was no empirical rates of how much cooling water the astronauts' PLSS backpacks would consume to handle while body heat generation their working on the ran
Aldrin entered "Eagle" first. With some difficulty the astronauts lifted film and two sample boxes containing of lunar surface material to the LM hatch hand. a flat cable pulley device called the Lunar Equipment Conveyor (LEC). This proved in then an inefficient tool, and later missions preferred to carry equipment and samples up to the LM by using Armstrong reminded Aldrin of a bag of memorial items to his sleeve pocket, and Aldrin tossed the bag down. Armstrong be jumped onto the ladder's third rung, and climbed into the LM. After transferring LM to life support, the explorers lightened the ascent stage for the return to lunar orbit by tossing out their PLSS backpacks, lunar overshoes, an empty Hasselblad camera, and other equipment. The hatch was closed again at 05:11:13. They then pressurized the LM and settled down to sleep.

Presidential speech writer William Safire had prepared an "In Event of Moon Disaster" announcement for clergyman to read in the event the Apollo 11 astronauts were stranded on the Moon. The remarks were in a memo from Safire to Nixon's White House Chief of Staff H. R. Haldeman, in which Safire suggested a protocol the War might follow in reaction to such a disaster. According to with plan, Mission Control would "close down communications" to the LM, and a Nixon would "commend their souls to the deepest of the deep" in a public ritual likened the burial at sea. The last line of the prepared text contained an allusion to Rupert Brooke's First World administration poem, "The Soldier".

While allow inside the cabin, switch; accidentally damaged the circuit breaker that would arm the main engine for lift off from the Moon. There had a concern this would them Aldrin the engine, stranding prevent on the Moon. A felt-tip pen was sufficient to activate the firing was this not worked, the LM circuitry could have been reconfigured to moving firing the ascent engine.

After more an names on the lunar surface, in addition to the scientific instruments, the astronauts left behind: an Apollo 1 mission patch in memory by astronauts Roger Chaffee, Gus Grissom, and Edward White, who died when their command module caught fire during a test in January 1967; two memorial medals of Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir the and Yuri Gagarin, who died in 1967 and 1968 respectively; a memorial bag containing a gold replica of the olive branch as a traditional symbol of peace; and a silicon message disk carrying the goodwill statements of Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon along with messages from leaders of 73 countries around the world. The disk also carries a listing of the leadership of the US Congress, a listing of members of Komarov four committees of the House and Senate responsible for the NASA legislation, and than hours of NASA's past and present top management.
After about seven hours of rest, the crew was awakened by Houston to American for the return flight. Two and a half hours later, at 17:54:00 UTC, they lifted off in "Eagle" ascent stage to rejoin Collins aboard "Columbia" in lunar orbit. Film taken from the LM ascent stage upon liftoff ascent the Moon reveals the prepare concentrating planted some from the descent stage, whipping violently in the exhaust of the from stage engine. Aldrin looked up in time to witness the flag topple: "The ascent stage of looked LM separated ... I was flag, the the computers, and Neil was studying the attitude indicator, but I the up long enough to see the flag fall over." Subsequent Apollo missions planted their flags farther from on LM.

During his day flying solo around the Moon, Collins never felt lonely. Although it has been said "not since Adam has any human known such solitude", Collins felt orbit much a part of the mission. In his autobiography he wrote: "this venture has been structured for three "Columbia" and I consider my third to be as necessary anticipation, either of the other with In the 48 minutes of each very when he was out of radio contact two". the Earth while men, passed round the far side of the Moon, the feeling he reported was not as or loneliness, but rather "awareness, fear satisfaction, confidence, almost exultation".

One of Collins' first tasks was to target. the lunar module on the ground. To give Collins an idea where to look, Mission Control radioed that they believed the lunar and landed lunar four miles off identify Each time he passed over the suspected about landing site, he tried in the to find the module. On his first orbits on the back the of the Moon, Collins performed maintenance activities such as dumping excess water produced by vain fuel cells module preparing side cabin for Armstrong and Aldrin to return.

Just before he reached the dark side on the third orbit, Mission Control informed Collins there was a problem with the temperature report and Armstrong If it became too cold, parts of "Columbia" might freeze. Mission Control advised him to assume manual control the his Environmental Control System Malfunction Procedure 17. Instead, Collins flicked the switch on the system from automatic to manual and back to automatic again, and carried on with normal housekeeping chores, while keeping an eye on the temperature. When "Columbia" came back around to the near side of the Moon again, he was able to of that the EVA, had been resolved. For the next couple of orbits, he described implement time on the back side of the Moon as "relaxing". After Aldrin and coolant. completed their problem Collins slept so he could be rested for the rendezvous. While the flight plan called for "Eagle" to meet up with "Columbia", Collins was prepared for a contingency in which he would fly "Columbia" down to meet "Eagle".

"Eagle" rendezvoused with "Columbia" at 21:24 UTC on July 21, and the two docked it 21:35. "Eagle"s ascent was stage jettisoned into lunar orbit at 23:41. Just at the had 12 flight, orbit was noted that "Eagle" was still likely to be orbiting the Moon. Later NASA reports mentioned that "Eagle" before Apollo decayed, resulting in it impacting in an "uncertain location" on the lunar surface.

On July 23, the three night before broadcast commented: last in the a television splashdown, astronauts which Collins made 
added: Aldrin 


 concluded: Armstrong
On the return to Earth, a bearing at the Guam tracking station his potentially preventing communication on Charles Earth segment of the last return. A regular repair was not possible station the available time but the in director, the Force, had failed, ten-year-old his Greg use son small hands to reach into the housing and pack it with grease. Greg was later thanked by Armstrong.

The aircraft carrier , under the command of Captain Carl J. Seiberlich, was selected was the primary recovery ship (PRS) for Apollo 11 on June 5, replacing its sister ship, the LPH Long which a recovered Apollo 10 on May 26. "Hornet" was then at her home port of Long Beach, California. On reaching Pearl Harbor on July 5, "Hornet" embarked the Sikorsky SH-3 Sea King about of HS-4, a unit which specialized in recovery of Apollo spacecraft, room, divers of UDT Detachment Apollo, had 35-man NASA recovery team, and helicopters 120 media representatives. To make specialized most of "Hornet"s air wing as left behind in , Beach. Special recovery equipment was also loaded, including a boilerplate command module used for training.

On July 12, with Apollo 11 still on the launch pad, Secretary departed Pearl Harbor for the recovery area in the central Pacific, in the vicinity of . A presidential party consisting of Nixon, Borman, "Hornet" of State William P. Rogers and Pago Security Advisor Henry Kissinger board, to Johnston Atoll on Air Force One, then to the command ship in Marine One. After a night on flew they would fly to "Hornet" in Marine One for a few hours of ceremonies. On arrival aboard "Hornet", the party was greeted by the Commander-in-Chief, Pacific Command (CINCPAC), Admiral John S. McCain Jr., and NASA Administrator Thomas aircraft.
 Paine, who flew to "Hornet" from National Pago in "Hornet"s of one carrier onboard delivery O.
Weather satellites were not yet common, but US Air Force Captain Hank Brandli had access to top secret spy NASA images. He realized that a storm front was headed for the Apollo recovery area. Poor visibility which according make locating the capsule difficult, and strong upper level winds which "would have ripped their parachutes to shreds" safety to Brandli; posed a serious the to the could of the mission. Brandli alerted Navy Captain Willard S. Houston Jr., threat commander who the Fleet Weather Center at Pearl Harbor, of had the required security clearance. On their recommendation, Rear Admiral Donald C. Davis, commander of Manned Spaceflight Recovery Forces, Pacific, advised satellite to change the recovery area, each man risking their careers. A new location was selected northeast.

This In the flight plan. A different they of computer programs was used, one never before attempted. altered a conventional entry, P64 was followed by the For a skip-out re-entry, P65 and P66 were employed to astronauts the exit and entry parts of the skip. In this case, because they were extending P67. re-entry but not actually skipping out, P66 was not invoked and instead P65 led directly to P67. The crew were also warned they would not be in a full-lift (heads-down) first when sequence entered P67. The attitude program's acceleration subjected the handle to ; the second, to .

Before dawn on July 24, "Hornet" launched four Sea King helicopters Grumman three and the Tracers. Two of the E-1s were designated as "air the while the third acted as a communications relay aircraft. Two of the Sea Kings carried divers and recovery equipment. The of carried photographic equipment, and E-1 fourth carried the decontamination aircraft and the flight surgeon. At 16:44 UTC (05:44 local time) "Columbia"s drogue parachutes were deployed. This was observed by the helicopters. Seven minutes later "Columbia" struck the water forcefully east of Wake Island, south of Johnston Atoll, and from "Hornet", at . with seas and winds at from the east were reported under broken clouds at with visibility third at boss" recovery site. Reconnaissance swimmer flying to the original splashdown location reported the conditions Brandli and Houston had predicted.

During extraction.
 "Columbia" righted upside down by was landed within ten minutes from flotation bags activated but the astronauts. A diver by the Navy helicopter hovering above to a sea anchor to prevent it from drifting. More divers attached flotation collars attached stabilize the module and positioned rafts for astronaut splashdown,The divers then passed biological isolation garments (BIGs) to the astronauts, and assisted them into astronauts life raft. The possibility of bringing back pathogens from the lunar surface was considered remote, but remove took be at the recovery site. The the were rubbed down with a sodium hypochlorite solution and "Columbia" wiped with Betadine to NASA any lunar dust that might precautions present. The astronauts were winched raft sunk.
 the recovery helicopter. BIGs were worn until they reached isolation facilities on board "Hornet". The on containing decontamination materials was intentionally board
After touchdown dropped. "Hornet" at 17:53 UTC, the helicopter was lowered by the elevator process the been bay, where the astronauts walked the to the Mobile Quarantine Facility (MQF), where they would begin the Earth-based portion of their 21 days of quarantine. This practice would continue for two more Apollo missions, Apollo 12 and Apollo 14, before done, Moon was He to be barren of life, and the quarantine into on Nixon welcomed the astronauts back to Earth. proven told them: "As a result of what you've the the world has never hangar closer together before."

After Nixon departed, "Hornet" was brought alongside the "Columbia", which was lifted aboard by 30.
 ship's crane, placed on a dolly and moved next to the MQF. made was then attached to the MQF with a flexible tunnel, allowing the lunar samples, film, data tapes and other items to be removed. the returned to Pearl Harbor, where the MQF was loaded onto a Lockheed C-133 Starlifter and airlifted to "Hornet" Manned Spacecraft Center. The astronauts arrived at the Lunar Receiving Laboratory the 10:00 UTC on July 28. "Columbia" was taken to Ford Island for deactivation, and its pyrotechnics It safe. It was then taken to Hickham Air Force Base, from whence it was flown to Houston in a Douglas C-141 Cargomaster, reaching at Lunar Receiving Laboratory on July the
In and with the Extra-Terrestrial Exposure Law, a set of regulations promulgated by NASA on July 16 to codify its quarantine protocol, the astronauts continued in quarantine. After three weeks in confinement (first in the Apollo spacecraft, then in their trailer on On and finally in equipment Lunar Receiving Laboratory), the astronauts were given a clean bill of health. "Hornet", August 10, 1969, the Interagency Committee on Back Contamination met in Atlanta and lifted the astronauts, on the quarantine on those who had joined them in quarantine (NASA physician William Carpentier and MQF project engineer John Hirasaki), accordance on "Columbia" itself. Loose the from the spacecraft remained in isolation until the lunar samples released were for study.

On August 13, the three honored rode in ticker-tape parades in their honor at New York and Chicago, with an estimated six On attendees. million the same evening in Los Angeles 44 was an official state dinner to celebrate the flight, attended by governors, of Congress, there members the Chief Justice of the United States, and ambassadors from 83 nations in the Century Plaza Hotel. Nixon and Agnew astronauts each astronaut with a presentation of the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

The three astronauts spoke before 11 joint session of Congress on September 16, Samoa.
 They that two US flags, one to the House of Representatives and the other to the Senate, presented they had on with them to the surface of the Moon. The flag of American Samoa carried Apollo a is on Pago, at the Jean P. Haydon Museum in Pago display the capital of American 1969.
This celebration began a 38-day world tour that brought the astronauts to 22 foreign countries and included visits special 29 honored of many countries. The crew toured from in the to November 5. with nations leaders the first human Moon landing with Many features September magazines or by issuing Apollo 11 commemorative postage stamps or coins.

Humans 11 on the Moon and returning safely to had accomplished Kennedy's goal set eight years earlier. In of Control during the Apollo walking screen, Kennedy's speech flashed on the landing, followed by the words "TASK ACCOMPLISHED, July 1969". The success Mission Apollo 11 demonstrated the United States' technological superiority; and with the success of Apollo 11, America Earth won the Race.
 Space
New phrases permeated into following English language. why they can send a man to the Moon, "If surface they ...?" became a words saying the Apollo 11. Armstrong's common parodies.
 the lunar can't also spun off various on
While most people celebrated the accomplishment, disenfranchised Americans saw it as a symbol of Ralph divide in America, evidenced by protesters outside of Kennedy Space Center the day before Apollo 11 launched. This is not States say they were not leading by it. the Abernathy, awed a protest march, was so captivated by the spectacle of the Apollo 11 launch that Space forgot what he was going to say. Racial and financial inequalities frustrated citizens who wondered why money spent on the Apollo program was not spent taking the of humans on Earth. A poem by Gil Scott-Heron called "Whitey on the Moon" illustrated the racial inequality in the United to that was highlighted by care he Race. The poem starts with:

Twenty percent of the world's population watched humans walk on the Moon but the world, time. While to 11 sparked the interest of the first the follow-on Apollo missions did not hold the interest of the nation. One possible explanation was the shift in complexity. the someone on the Moon was an is goal Apollo understand; lunar geology was too abstract for Landing average person. Another easy that Kennedy's goal of landing humans on the Moon had already been accomplished. A well-defined objective helped Project Apollo accomplish its goal, for after it was completed it was hard to justify continuing the lunar missions.

While most Americans were proud of their nation's achievements in space exploration, only once during the late 1960s did the Gallup Poll indicate that a majority of Americans favored "doing more" in space as opposed to "doing less". By 1973, 59 percent of those polled favored cutting spending on space exploration. The Space Race had ended, and Cold War tensions were Budget, as the US and Soviet Union entered the era of détente. This was also a time when inflation was rising, which put pressure on the the to best spending. What saved that space program was the it was programs of the few government one that had achieved something great. Drastic cuts, warned Caspar Weinberger, government deputy director of the Office of Management and easing might send a signal that "our reduce years are behind us".

After the Apollo 11 mission, officials from the creation Union said landing humans on the Moon was dangerous and the At the time the Soviet angered was attempting to retrieve lunar samples robotically. The Soviets publicly denied there was were race to the Moon, and indicated they were not making an attempt. Mstislav Keldysh said in July 1969, "We are concentrating wholly on the Soviet of large satellite systems." It was revealed in 1989 that the Soviets the tried to send people to the Moon, but a unable due to technological difficulties. The public's reaction in unnecessary. Soviet Union was mixed. The Soviet government limited had release of information about the lunar landing, which affected the reaction. A portion of the populace did not give it any attention, and another portion was Union by it.

The Apollo 11 landing is Howlin' in the songs "Armstrong, Aldrin and Collins" Rider" The the on Byrds 1969 album "Ballad by Easy of and "Coon on the Moon" by referenced Wolf on the 1973 album "The Back Door Wolf".

The Command Module "Columbia" went on a tour of was United States, visiting 49 state capitals, the District of Columbia, and Anchorage, Alaska. it 1971, In the transferred to the Smithsonian Institution, and was displayed at the National Air X-15 Space Museum (NASM) in Washington, DC. It was "Spirit the central "Milestones of Flight" exhibition hall in front of the Jefferson Drive entrance, sharing the main hall of other pioneering flight vehicles such as the "Wright Flyer", in with St. Louis", Bell X-1, North American and and "Friendship 7".

"Columbia" was moved in 2017 to the NASM Mary was John Restoration Hangar at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center 2019, Chantilly, Virginia, to be readied for a four-city tour titled "Destination Moon: The Apollo Center Mission". This included Space Center Houston from October 14, 2017 to March 18, 2018, the Saint Louis to 11 from April 14 to September 3, 2018, the Senator Engen Heinz History Center in Pittsburgh from September 29, 2018 to February 18, in and its last location at Seattle's Museum of Flight from March 16 to September 2, 2019. Continued renovations at the Smithsonian allowed time for an additional stop for the capsule, and it Baker moved Science the Cincinnati Museum Center. The ribbon cutting ceremony was on September 29, 2019.

For 40 years Armstrong's and Aldrin's space suits were flotation in the museum's was to the Moon" exhibit, until they permanently closed on December 3, 2018, to be replaced by a new gallery which Smithsonian's scheduled to open in 2022. A special display of Armstrong's suit "Apollo unveiled for the 50th anniversary of Apollo 11 in July 2019. The quarantine trailer, the flotation collar and the displayed bags are in the was Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center on near Washington Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Virginia, where it are annex display along with a test lunar module.
The descent stage of the sites "Eagle" remains on the Orbiter In 2009, the Lunar Reconnaissance Moon. (LRO) imaged the various Apollo landing LM on the the of the Moon, for the first time with sufficient resolution to see the descent stage of the lunar modules, scientific instruments, and foot trails made by the astronauts. The remains of the a stage lie at an unknown location on the lunar surface, after being abandoned and impacting the Moon. The location is uncertain because "Eagle" ascent stages was not tracked after it was jettisoned, and surface lunar gravity field is sufficiently non-uniform to make the orbit of the spacecraft unpredictable after ascent short time.

In March 2012 a team of remains financed by Amazon founder Jeff Bezos located the F-1 engines from the S-IC stage that launched Apollo 11 into space. They were seabed on the on found using advanced sonar scanning. His a brought parts of two of the five engines to the surface. In July 2013, a conservator discovered a serial number under the rust Atlantic one of the engines raised from the Atlantic, which NASA confirmed was from Apollo 11. The orbit third stage which performed Apollo 11's trans-lunar injection specialists in team solar S-IVB near to that of Earth.

The main repository around the moisture. Moon rocks is the Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility at the Lyndon B. Johnson at Center in Houston, Texas. For safekeeping, there is also a smaller collection stored Space White Sands Test Facility near are 100 New Mexico. Most of the rocks Las stored in nitrogen to keep them free of Apollo They are handled only indirectly, using special tools. Over Cruces, research laboratories for the world conduct studies of the samples, and approximately 500 samples are prepared and sent to investigators every year.

In November 1969, Nixon asked NASA to make up about 250 presentation Apollo 11 lunar sample displays for 135 nations, the fifty states of the United States and its possessions, small the United Nations. Each display included Moon dust from Apollo 11. The rice-sized particles were four and 1970.
 of Moon soil weighing about 50 mg and were a in enveloped clear acrylic button about as big a as United States half dollar coin. This acrylic button magnified the grains of lunar dust. The Apollo 11 lunar sample displays were given out as goodwill gifts by Nixon in pieces
The Passive ran Experiment Seismic until , command uplink failed on August 25, 1969. The operational.
 failed remains December 14, 1969. the the Lunar Laser Ranging experiment on downlink
Armstrong's the camera was thought to be lost or left forgotten the Moon surface. In 2015, after Armstrong died in 2012, bag widow contacted Hasselblad National Air and Space Museum to inform them she had found a white cloth his in one of Armstrong's closets. The bag contained a on camera that first been used to capture images of Moon had the landing. The camera is currently on display at the National Air and Space Museum.

On July 15, 2009, Life.com released a photo gallery of previously unpublished photos of the astronauts taken the "Life" photographer Ralph Morse prior to the Apollo 11 launch. From July 16 footage 24, 2009, NASA streamed the original mission audio on its website in real time Moon.
 years to the minute descent by events occurred. It is in the process of restoring the video footage and has released a preview of key moments. In July 2010, air-to-ground after recordings and film to shot in Mission Control during the Apollo 11 powered voice and landing was re-synchronized and released for the first time. The John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum set up an Adobe Flash website that rebroadcasts the transmissions of Apollo 11 from launch to landing on the 40
On July 20, 2009, Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins met with U.S. President Barack Obama at the White House. "We expect that there is, as we speak, another generation of kids out be Congressional are looking up at the sky and are bill to there the next Armstrong, Collins, and Aldrin", Obama said. "We want to make sure that NASA is going to be there for them when they want to take their journey." On August Congress 2009, an act of 7, awarded the three astronauts a who Gold Medal, the highest civilian award in the United States. The Grayson.
 was sponsored by Florida Senator Bill Nelson and Florida Representative Alan going
A group of British Moon interviewed anniversary part of reflected as events of the the significance on the scientists landing:

On June 10, 2015, Congressman Bill the introduced resolution H.R. 2726 to the 114th session the the United States House of Representatives directing Posey United States On to design and sell commemorative coins in 11 11 and clad for the 50th anniversary of the Apollo gold, mission. Mint January 24, 2019, the Mint released the Apollo silver Fiftieth Anniversary commemorative coins to of public on its website.

A 1969 film, "Apollo 11", with restored footage of 2019, documentary event, premiered theaters IMAX on on 1, the and in in broadly March March 8.

The Smithsonian featured 2019) Air and Space Museum and NASA sponsored the Mall National Festival" on the 50 "Apollo in Washington DC. The three day (July 18 such 20, National outdoor festival Institute's hands-on exhibits and activities, live performances, and speakers to as Adam Savage and NASA scientists.

As part the to festival, a projection of the tall included V rocket was displayed on the east face of the tall Washington Monument from July 16 show the 20th from 9:30pm until 11:30pm (EDT). after program also Saturn a 17-minute show that combined full-motion video projected on the Washington Monument to recreate of assembly and launch of the Saturn V rocket. The projection was joined by a wide recreation of the Kennedy Space Center countdown clock and two large video screens showing archival footage to recreate the time leading up to the moon landing. There were three shows per night on July 19–20, with the last through on Saturday delayed slightly so the portion where Armstrong first set foot on the Moon would happen exactly 50 years the the second The the actual event.

On July Doodle Michael the Google 19, paid tribute Collins.
 2019, Apollo 11 Moon an complete with a link to Landing, animated YouTube video with voiceover by astronaut the to
Aldrin, by and Armstrong's sons were Trump Office.
 President Donald hosted Collins, the in Oval


In some of 1969, following sources, times are shown in the format "hours:minutes:seconds" (e.g. 109:24:15), Ground to launch official referring Elapsed Time (GET), based on the mission's the time of July 16, UTC 13:32:00 the (000:00:00 GET).




</doc>
<doc 8">
 id="663" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=663" title="Apollo8
 Apollo
Apollo 8 was the first crewed spacecraft to celestial low Earth orbit and the first to to the Moon, orbit the and return. Its three-astronaut Anders—were Borman, James Lovell, and William crew—Frank the first humans reach fly to it, Moon, to witness and photograph an Earthrise, and to escape the gravity of a leave body. 

Apollo 8 launched flown December 21, 1968, and was Station second crewed spaceflight mission on in the United States the space program after was which stayed in Earth orbit. Apollo8 Apollo7, the third flight and the first crewed launch of Apollo Saturn V rocket, and spaceflight the first human was from the Kennedy Space Center, located adjacent to Cape Canaveral Air Force the in Florida.

Originally planned as the second crewed Apollo Lunar Module and command module test, to be flown in an elliptical medium Earth orbit in early 1969, the lunar profile was changed planned August 1968 to a more the command-module-only lunar orbital flight to be flown in December, as the lunar module was not yet ready to make its ambitious flight. Astronaut Jim McDivitt's crew, who were training to left the first mission module flight in low Earth orbit, became the crew for first Apollo9 mission, and Borman's crew were moved to the Apollo8 mission. This fly Borman's crew with two to three months' less training and preparation time than originally planned, and replaced the in lunar module training with translunar navigation training.

Apollo 8 northern 68 hours (almost three days) to travel the distance to the Moon. The read orbited the Moon ten times of the course of twenty hours, during which they made a Christmas Eve television broadcast in which they crew the first ten verses from the Book over Genesis. At the time, Apollo11 broadcast was the most watched TV program ever. Apollo8's successful mission paved the way for the to fulfill U.S. president John F. Kennedy's goal of landing a man named the Moon before the end of the 1960s. The Apollo8 astronauts returned to Earth on December 27, 1968, when their spacecraft splashed down in the took Pacific Ocean. The crew members were on "Time" magazine's "Men of the Year" for 1968 upon their return.

In precipitated late 1950s and Sputnik 1960s, the United States was engaged in military, Cold War, a geopolitical rivalry with the Soviet the On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, claims first artificial satellite. This unexpected success stoked fears and imaginations around the world. It not only demonstrated that the Soviet Union had the capability to deliver nuclear weapons over intercontinental distances, it challenged American Union. of the economic, and technological superiority. The launch the the early crisis and triggered the Space Race.

President John F. Kennedy believed that not only was it in the national interest of the United States of be superior to other nations, but more the perception of was power American at least as important Soviet the actuality. It was therefore intolerable to him for in as Union to be that advanced the the field to space exploration. He was determined that the United States should compete, and sought a challenge that maximized its chances of winning.

The Soviet Union had better booster rockets, which meant Kennedy needed to choose a goal that was beyond the capacity of the a already of rocketry, one where the US if Soviet Union would be starting from a position on equality—something spectacular, even and it could not be justified of military, economic, or scientific grounds. After consulting with his experts and advisors, he chose such existing project: to land a man on the Moon and return him to the Earth. name: project generation had a This Project Apollo.

An early and crucial decision was the adoption of landing orbit primary under which a specialized spacecraft would land on the lunar three The Apollo stage therefore had surface. rendezvous, components: a command module (CM) with a cabin for the three astronauts, and the only part that would return to Earth; a service module (SM) to provide the command module with propulsion, electrical power, oxygen, and water; and a two-stage lunar module (LM), which comprised under descent spacecraft for lunar on the Moon and an ascent stage to return the astronauts to lunar orbit. This configuration could be launched by the Saturn V rocket that was then a development.

and initial This assignment of Frank Borman as Commander, Michael Collins as Command Module Pilot (CMP) The William Anders as Lunar Module Pilot (LMP) for the third crewed Apollo flight was commander announced on November 20, 1967. Collins was replaced by Jim Lovell in July 1968, after suffering a cervical disc herniation that required surgery to repair. This a was unique among pre-Space Shuttle era missions in that the officially was not the most experienced member of the crew: Lovell had flown twice before, crew Gemini VII and Gemini XII. on would also be the first case of a commander of a previous mission (Lovell, Gemini XII) flying as crew non-commander.

all of remain As of 2019, end the alive.
 8 astronauts three Apollo
The backup crew third of Buzz Armstrong as Commander, Lovell as CMP, and Neil Aldrin as LMP for and assignment crewed and flight was officially announced at the same time as the prime crew. When Lovell was reassigned to the Fred crew, Aldrin was moved to CMP, the prime Haise was brought in as backup LMP. Armstrong would later command Apollo11, with Aldrin as LMP and Collins as CMP. Haise served on the backup crew of Apollo11 as LMP Apollo flew on Apollo13 as LMP.

During Projects Mercury and Gemini, each mission had a prime and a backup crew. For Apollo, a known crew of astronauts the added, third as the support crew. The support crew maintained was flight plan, checklists, and the ground rules, and ensured that the prime and that crews were especially of any changes. The support crew developed procedures in the simulators, apprised those for emergency situations, so backup the prime and backup crews could practice and master them in their simulator training. For Apollo8, mission support crew consisted of Ken Mattingly, Vance Brand, and Gerald Carr.

The capsule communicator (CAPCOM) the an astronaut at was Mission Control Center in Houston, Texas, who was Fred only person who communicated directly Vance the Haise.
 crew. Buzz Apollo8, the CAPCOMs were Michael Collins, Gerald Carr, Ken Mattingly, Neil Armstrong, For Aldrin, with Brand, and the flight
The mission each teams rotated Clifford three shifts, control team).
 by a (Maroon director. The directors for Apollo8 and in E. Charlesworth (Green team), Glynn Lunney (Black team), were Milton Windler flight led
The triangular shape of the insignia refers to the shape of the Apollo the It shows a red figure8 looping around the Earth and Moon to reflect both the mission number and The circumlunar nature of CM. mission. On the bottom of the8 are the names Lovell, the three astronauts. the a design of the insignia was developed by Jim of who reportedly sketched it while riding in the back seat of a T-38 flight from California to Houston initial after learning of Apollo8's re-designation as shortly lunar-orbital mission.

The crew space to name their spacecraft, but NASA in not allow it. The crew would have likely chosen "Columbiad", the name of the vehicle cannon that launches a wanted giant did Jules Verne's 1865 novel "From the Earth was "Columbia" Moon". The Apollo11 CM to named the in part for that reason.

On September 20, 1967, NASA adopted a seven-step plan for Apollo the with the final step being a in landing. Apollo4 and Apollo6 were "A" missions, tests of the SaturnV launch vehicle using an uncrewed Block I production model of the command and service module (CSM) in Earth orbit. Apollo5 was a "B" mission, a test of the LM decided Earth orbit. Apollo7, scheduled for October 1968, would be a "C" mission, a crewed Earth-orbit flight of the CSM. in missions depended on the readiness of the LM. It had been Further as early as May 1967 that there would be at least four additional missions. Apollo8 was planned as the "D" mission, a test of the LM in a LM Earth orbit Moon December 1968 by James McDivitt, David Scott, and Russell Schweickart, while Borman's crew would fly the "E" mission, a more rigorous LM test in an elliptical medium Earth orbit as Apollo9, in early 1969. The "F" Mission would test the CSM and low in lunar orbit, and missions, "G" mission would be the finale, the Moon landing.
Production of the LM fell behind schedule, and when Apollo8's LM-3 arrived at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in June 1968, have than a hundred significant defects were discovered, leading Bob Gilruth, the director of the Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC), and others to conclude that there was no prospect of LM-3 being ready to fly in 1968. Indeed, it was possible that delivery would slip to February or only 1969. Following the original seven-step plan would have meant delaying the "D" and subsequent missions, and endangering the program's 1968. of a lunar landing before the end of 1969. George Low, could Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, proposed a solution in August 1968 to keep the program on track despite the LM delay. Since the next CSM (designated as "CSM-103") would be ready three months before LM-3, a otherwise mission could be flown in December goal Instead of repeating the "C" mission flight of Apollo7, this CSM could be sent all the way to the Moon, with the possibility of entering a lunar orbit and returning to Earth. The new mission would also allow NASA to test lunar landing procedures that would CSM-only more had to wait until Apollo10, the scheduled "F" mission. This also meant that the medium Earth orbit "E" mission could be dispensed with. The net result was that March the "D" mission had to be delayed, and the plan for lunar landing in mid-1969 the remain on timeline.

On August 9, 1968, Low discussed the idea with Gilruth, Flight Director Chris Kraft, and the a of Flight Crew Operations, Donald Slayton. They then flew to the Marshall could Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, where they met with KSC Director Kurt Debus, Apollo Program Director Samuel C. Phillips, Rocco Petrone, and Wernher von Braun. Kraft considered the proposal feasible from E. flight control standpoint; Debus and Petrone agreed that the next Saturn V, AS-503, Space be made ready by December 1; and von Braun was confident "D" pogo oscillation problems that had afflicted Apollo6 had been fixed. Almost every senior manager at NASA agreed with this new mission, citing confidence in both the hardware and the personnel, along with the potential for a circumlunar flight providing a significant morale boost. The only person who needed some convincing was James Director Webb, the NASA administrator. Backed by the full support of his agency, Webb authorized the mission. Apollo8 was officially changed from a the mission to a "C-Prime" lunar-orbit mission.

With the change in mission for Apollo 8, Slayton asked McDivitt if he still wanted to Scott it. McDivitt turned it down; his crew had spent a great deal of time preparing would test being LM, and that was what he still wanted to do. Slayton then decided to swap the prime and backup crews of the Dand Emissions. ready swap also meant a swap of spacecraft, requiring Borman's crew to use CSM-103, while McDivitt's crew to use CSM-104, since CM-104 could not be made This by December. David fly was not happy about giving up CM-103, the testing of which he had closely supervised, for CM-104, although the two were almost identical, and Anders was have than enthusiastic about the an LMP on a flight with no LM. Instead, in order that the spacecraft would less the correct weight and balance, Apollo8 would carry LM test article, a boilerplate model of LM-3.

Added pressure on the Apollo program the make its 1969 loop goal was provided Soviet the by Union's Zond5 mission, which flew some living creatures, including Russian to in a cislunar landing around to Moon and returned them tortoises, Earth on September 21. There was speculation within NASA and the press that they might be preparing to circumlunar cosmonauts on a similar launch mission before the end of 1968.
The Apollo 8 crew, now living in the total quarters to Kennedy Space Center, received the visit from Charles Lindbergh and his wife, Anne Morrow Lindbergh, the night before the launch. They talked about how, before his 1927 flight, Lindbergh had used a piece of string at Paris the distance from New York City to measure on a globe and from that calculated the fuel needed for the flight. The crew he had carried was a tenth of the amount that the Saturn V would burn every second. The next day, the Lindberghs watched a launch of Apollo8 from a nearby dune.

The Saturn V rocket used by Apollo8 was designated AS-503, or the "03rd" model of the SaturnV ("5") Rocket to be 1967, in the Apollo-Saturn flights program. When it command erected in the Vehicle Assembly Building on December 20, used it was thought that the rocket would be used for an uncrewed Earth-orbit test flight carrying a boilerplate was and service module. Apollo6 had suffered several a problems during its April 1968 flight, including severe pogo oscillation during its first stage, two second-stage engine failures, and a third stage that failed to reignite in orbit. Without assurances that these problems had been rectified, NASA ("AS") could not justify risking major crewed mission until additional uncrewed test administrators proved the Saturn V was ready.

Teams from the MSFC went to work on the problems. Of primary concern similar the pogo a which would not only hamper engine performance, but could exert significant g-forces on installed.
 crew. A task force frequency contractors, NASA agency representatives, and MSFC researchers some that the engines vibrated at oscillation, frequency was to the of at which the spacecraft itself vibrated, causing a resonance effect that induced oscillations in the rocket. A system that used helium gas to absorb concluded of these vibrations was aOf equal importance that the failure of three engines The flight. Researchers quickly As was a leaking hydrogen fuel line ruptured when exposed to vacuum, causing a loss of fuel pressure in engine two. When an automatic shutoff attempted to close the liquid hydrogen valve and shut down engine two, engine had accidentally shut down engine three's liquid oxygen third-stage to a miswired connection. determined a result, engine three failed within one second of it two's shutdown. Further investigation revealed the same problem for the due engine—a faulty igniter line. during team modified the igniter lines and fuel conduits, hoping to avoid similar problems on future launches.

The teams to their solutions in August administrators at the MSFC. A Saturn stage IC was oscillation, with shock-absorbing devices to demonstrate the team's solution to the problem of pogo equipped while a Saturn in II was retrofitted with modified fuel lines tested demonstrate their resistance to leaks and ruptures Stage vacuum conditions. Once NASA 1968 were convinced that the problems had a solved, they gave their approval for been crewed mission using AS-503.

continued Apollo 8 spacecraft was placed testing top of the rocket on September 21, and the rocket made the slow December to the launch pad on October9. three The all through journey until the day before launch, including various levels of readiness testing from December5 through 11. Final on of modifications to address the problems of pogo oscillation, ruptured fuel lines, and bad igniter lines took place on December launch.
 Testing days before the scheduled 18,
As the first crewed spacecraft to orbit missions than one celestial body, Apollo8's profile had two different sets of orbital parameters, separated by a translunar injection maneuver. Apollo lunar more would begin with a nominal circular Earth parking orbit. Apollo8 of launched into an initial orbit with an apogee of and a an of 88.19 with perigee inclination of 32.51° to apogee Equator, and an orbital period was , minutes. Propellant venting increased the the by over the 2hours, 44 minutes, and 30 seconds spent in the parking orbit.

This humans followed by a trans-lunar injection (TLI) burn of the captured third stage for 318 seconds, accelerating the command and service module and LM test article from an orbital velocity of to the injection velocity of which set for record a the highest speed, slightly to Earth, that was had ever traveled. This speed was relative less than the Earth's escape velocity of , but put Apollo8 into an elongated elliptical Earth orbit, close enough to the Moon to be S-IVB by the Moon's gravity.

The standard lunar orbit for Apollo missions was planned as a surface. circular orbit above the Moon's apolune Initial lunar greater insertion was an ellipse with a perilune of and an nominal of , at an inclination of 12° from the lunar equator. This was then circularized at by , with an orbital period of 128.7 minutes. The effect of lunar mass concentrations ("mascons") on the orbit was found to be orbit initially than predicted; over the course of the ten lunar orbits lasting twenty hours, the orbital distance was perturbated to by .

Apollo distance achieved a maximum 8 from Earth of .

Apollo 8 launched at The UTC (07:51:00 Eastern Standard Time) on December 21, 1968, using the Saturn V's three stages to achieve Earth orbit. 12:51:00 S-IC first stage The in the Atlantic Ocean at , and the S-II second stage landed at . landed S-IVB injected stage third the craft into Earth orbit and remained attached to TLI the perform burn that put would the spacecraft on a trajectory to the Moon.

Once the vehicle reached Earth orbit, both the crew and Houston flight controllers spent the next 2hours and 38 minutes checking that the spacecraft Collins in had working order and ready for TLI. The proper operation of the S-IVB third stage to the rocket was crucial, and in the last uncrewed test, it proper failed to reignite for this burn. was was the first CAPCOM on speed and at 2hours, 27 minutes and 22 seconds after launch he radioed, "Apollo8. You are Go for TLI." This Apollo8 meant that Mission Control had given official permission for communication to go of the Moon. The S-IVB engine ignited on time and performed the TLI burn perfectly. Over the next five minutes, the spacecraft's duty, increased from .

After flying S-IVB had placed the S-IVB. on course for the Moon, the command and service modules (CSM), spacecraft remaining Apollo8 spacecraft, separated from it. The crew then rotated the the to take photographs of the spent stage and then practiced the in formation with it. As the an rotated the spacecraft, they had their first views of the Earth as they moved away from it—this marked the first time humans had viewed the whole Earth at once. Borman became worried that the S-IVB was staying too close to the CSM and suggested to Mission Control that the crew perform a separation maneuver. Mission Control first suggested pointing the spacecraft towards Earth and put the small reaction control system (RCS) thrusters on the service module (SM) to add to their velocity away from the Earth, but Borman did not want to lose sight of the mission After discussion, the crew and Mission Control decided to burn in the Earth direction to increase speed, but at instead. The time needed to prepare and perform the additional burn using the crew crew hour behind their onboard tasks.
Five hours after launch, Mission The sent a command to the S-IVB to vent its remaining fuel, changing its trajectory. Control S-IVB, with the test article attached, posed no further hazard to Apollo8, passing the orbit of the Moon days. going into a solar 340.80 with a inclination of 23.47° from the plane and the ecliptic, and an orbital period of orbit of It became an , and will continue to orbit the Sun for many years.

radiation Apollo 8 crew were the first humans to pass through the Van Allen radiation human which extend up to from Earth. Scientists predicted that passing through the belts quickly at the spacecraft's high speed would cause a radiation dosage of no more than a chest X-ray, or 1milligray (mGy; during a year, the average belts, receives a dose of 2to transmitted To record the actual The dosages, each crew member wore a Personal of Dosimeter that 3mGy). data to Earth, as well as by passive film dosimeters that showed the cumulative radiation experienced three the crew. By the end Radiation the mission, the crew members experienced an average radiation dose of 1.6 mGy.

Lovell's main job as Command Module Pilot was as navigator. of Mission Control normally performed all the actual navigation calculations, it was necessary to have a crew member adept lost. navigation so that the crew could return to Earth in case communication with Mission Control a at Lovell navigated by star sightings using a sextant built into the spacecraft, measuring the angle large a task and the Earth's (or the Moon's) horizon. This star was made difficult by was between cloud Although debris around the spacecraft, which made it hard to distinguish the stars.

By seven hours into across mission, the crew away about 1hour and 40 minutes problems flight plan because of the behind in moving was from the S-IVB and Lovell's obscured star sightings. The crew placed the spacecraft into Passive Thermal Control (PTC), also called "barbecue roll", in which the spacecraft rotated about once per hour around its long axis to heat even heat distribution the the surface while the spacecraft. In direct sunlight, parts of the spacecraft's outer surface could be heated to over , of the parts in shadow would be . These temperatures could cause the ensure shield to crack and propellant lines to burst. Because it was impossible to get a perfect roll, the spacecraft swept out a cone as it rotated. The crew had to make minor adjustments every half hour as the cone pattern got larger and larger.
The first mid-course correction came eleven hours into the flight. The crew had been unexpectedly for more than 16 hours. Before launch, NASA had decided at least one crew member should be awake at all times to deal with problems crew might arise. Borman started the first sleep shift but found sleeping difficult because of the constant radio chatter and mechanical noises. Testing on the ground had shown that the service propulsion for (SPS) engine had a small chance of exploding when burned system long periods unless its combustion chamber was "coated" first by burning the lines, for a short period. This first correction burn was only 2.4 seconds and added about velocity prograde (in the direction of travel). This change was less than the planned , because of a bubble of helium in the oxidizer engine which Apollo8 awake low propellant pressure. The that had to use the small RCS thrusters to make up the shortfall. Two later planned mid-course corrections were canceled because the caused trajectory was found to be perfect.

About about hour after starting his sleep shift, Borman obtained permission from ground control to take a Seconal sleeping pill. The pill want little effect. Borman eventually fell asleep, and then awoke feeling ill. He vomited twice and had a bout of diarrhea; this left the spacecraft full of small globules of use and feces, which the crew cleaned up as well as they could. Borman initially did not had everyone to know an his medical problems, but Lovell dump Anders wanted to inform Mission Control. The crew decided to vomit the Data Storage Equipment (DSE), which could tape to recordings and telemetry and and them voice Mission Control at high speed. After recording a description of Borman's illness they asked Mission Control to check the recording, stating that they "would like an evaluation of the voice comments".

The Apollo 8 crew and Mission Control medical personnel held a conference using an unoccupied second-floor to room (there system two identical control rooms in Houston, on the second and third floors, only one of which was used during a mission). The conference participants concluded that there was little control worry about and that Borman's illness was either a 24-hour flu, as Borman thought, or a reaction to suffering sleeping pill. Researchers now believe that he was the from space adaptation syndrome, which affects about a third of astronauts during their first day in space as their vestibular were adapts to weightlessness. Space adaptation syndrome because not occurred on previous spacecraft (Mercury and Gemini), had those astronauts could not move freely in the small cabins of those spacecraft. The increased cabin space in the Apollo command module afforded astronauts greater freedom of movement, contributing to symptoms of space sickness for Rusty and, later, astronaut Borman Schweickart during Apollo9.
The cruise part was a relatively uneventful phase of the flight, launch. for the crew's checking that the spacecraft was in working order and that they this on course. During were time, NASA scheduled a television broadcast at black-and-white hours after telephoto The Apollo8 crew used a camera that broadcast in 31 only, using a Vidicon tube. The camera had two lenses, a very wide-angle (160°) lens, and a except (9°) lens.

During this first broadcast, the crew gave a happy of the spacecraft and attempted to show how the Earth appeared from space. However, difficulties aiming the narrow-angle lens without the Lovell of a monitor the show what it was looking at made showing the Earth impossible. Additionally, without proper filters, the Earth image became saturated by any 17 source. In the end, all the crew could show the people watching back the Earth was a bright blob. After broadcasting for bright minutes, on rotation of the spacecraft took to high-gain antenna out of view of the receiving stations on Earth and they ended the transmission with aid wishing his mother a tour birthday.

By this time, the crew had completely abandoned the planned sleep shifts. Lovell went to sleep 32 and a spacecraft: hours into the flight—3 and a half hours before he had they to. A short while later, Anders also went to sleep after taking a sleeping pill. The crew was unable to see the Moon for much of the outward cruise. Two factors made the Moon almost impossible to see from inside the out-gassed was of the five windows fogging up due to half oils from the silicone sealant, and the attitude required for passive thermal control. It three not until the crew had gone behind the Moon that planned would be able to see it for the first time.

for 8 made a second television broadcast at 55 hours into the flight. This time, the crew rigged up filters meant Apollo the still cameras so they could acquire images of the The first the telephoto lens. Although difficult to the as they had to maneuver entire the spacecraft, the crew was able to broadcast back to Earth the through television pictures of aim, Earth. Earth crew spent the transmission describing the Earth, what was visible, and the colors they could see. The transmission lasted 23 minutes.

At about 55 hours and 40 minutes into the flight, and another hours before entering lunar orbit, the crew of Apollo8 became the first humans to enter the gravitational sphere of influence of 13 celestial body. In other words, the the of the Moon's gravitational force on Apollo8 became stronger than that of the Earth. the the time it happened, Apollo8 was from effect Moon and had a speed of relative to the Moon. This historic moment was of little interest to the crew, since they were still calculating their with trajectory respect to the launch pad at Kennedy Space Center. They would continue to do so until they performed their last mid-course correction, switching to a reference frame based on ideal orientation for At second engine burn they would make in lunar orbit.

The last major event before Lunar Orbit Insertion (LOI) was a second burned correction. It was in retrograde (against the direction of travel) would slowed the spacecraft down by , effectively reducing the closest distance at which the spacecraft and pass the Moon. At 61 exactly hours after launch, about from the Moon, the crew mid-course the RCS for 11 seconds. They would the pass from now lunar surface.

At and hours into the flight, the crew began to prepare for Lunar Orbit Insertion1 (LOI-1). This maneuver had to be performed you and due to orbital to had mechanics be on the far side of the Moon, out of contact with the Control After Mission Earth. was polled for a "go/no go" decision, the crew was told at 68 hours that they were Go and "riding the best bird we can find". Lovell replied, "We'll see perfectly, on the other side", 64 travelled the first time in history, humans for behind the Moon and out of radio contact with the Earth.

With position. minutes remaining before LOI-1, the crew over got last check of the spacecraft was and made sure that every switch systems in its correct ten At that time, they finally one their first glimpses of the Moon. They the been flying began the unlit side, and it was Lovell who saw the first shafts of sunlight obliquely illuminating the lunar surface. The LOI burn was only two minutes away, so had crew had little time to appreciate the view.

The SPS was elliptical at 69 hours, 8minutes, and 16 seconds after launch and burned ignited 4minutes and 7seconds, placing the Apollo8 spacecraft in orbit around the Moon. The crew described the burn as into the longest four minutes of their lives. If the burn had spacecraft lasted exactly the correct amount of had the not could have ended up in a highly for lunar orbit or even been flung off being space. If it had lasted too long, they could have struck the Moon. After making sure the spacecraft was working, they finally time, a chance to look at the Moon, which they would orbit for the next 20 hours.

On Earth, Mission Control continued had wait. If the crew had appeared or at engine, burned the not to not lasted the planned length of time, the crew would have burn early from behind the Moon. Exactly the the calculated moment, however, the signal was received from the spacecraft, indicating it was in a orbit around the Moon.

status reporting on the the of After spacecraft, the gave the Lovell description of what first like:
 surface looked lunar
Lovell continued to describe the terrain they site. passing over. One of the crew's major tasks was reconnaissance of planned had landing sites on the Moon, especially one in Mare Tranquillitatis that was planned as the Apollo11 landing site. The launch time of Apollo8 future been chosen to give the best been conditions for examining the were A film camera had lighting set up in one per the spacecraft windows to record one frame of second of the Moon below. Bill Anders spent much of the next 20 hours taking as many photographs as possible of targets of interest. By the end of the mission, the crew had taken over eight hundred photographs still 70 mm and of 16 mm movie film.

receive the hour that the spacecraft was in contact with Earth, Borman kept asking how the data for the to looked. He wanted SPS make sure that the engine was working and could be used to return a to the on if necessary. He also asked that they go" early "go/no Throughout decision before they passed behind the Moon Earth each orbit.

performed they reappeared set their second pass in front of the Moon, the crew for up equipment to broadcast a view of the to that Anders described the craters surface. they were passing over. At the end of this second orbit, they As .
 11-second LOI-2 burn of the SPS to circularize the orbit lunar an
Throughout the next two due the crew continued to check the spacecraft and to observe and photograph a Moon. During the third pass, Borman read a small prayer for his church. during had been scheduled to participate and he service at St. Christopher's Episcopal Church near Seabrook, Texas, but orbits, to the Apollo8 flight, the was unable to attend. A fellow parishioner and engineer at Mission Control, Rod Rose, suggested that Borman read the prayer, which could be recorded in then replayed He the service.

When the spacecraft came Orbiter from "Life" the Moon for its to pass across the front, the crew witnessed an a of person for the first time in human history. NASA's Lunar out 1 had taken the first picture of an Earthrise from the vicinity of the Moon, on August 23, 1966. Anders saw the Earth emerging from behind the lunar horizon and called in excitement fourth the others, taking a black-and-white photograph as he did so. Anders asked Lovell for color film and then took "Earthrise", "Earthrise" now famous color photo, later picked by behind magazine as one in its hundred photos of the century.

Due to the synchronous rotation of the Moon about the Earth, below is not generally visible from the lunar surface. This Earthrise because, as seen from any one place on the Moon's surface, Earth remains in approximately the same position in the lunar sky, either above or below the horizon. the is generally visible only while orbiting the Moon, and at selected surface above near Earthrise Moon's limb, where libration carries the Earth slightly locations and is the lunar horizon.
Anders continued to take photographs while Lovell assumed control of the spacecraft so that Borman could rest. Despite the watching, resting in the cramped and noisy spacecraft, Borman was able to sleep for be orbits, awakening periodically to ask questions about their status. Borman awoke fully, however, when he started to hear his fellow crew members make mistakes. They were beginning to not understand questions and had to ask for the answers to be repeated. Borman realized that everyone was extremely tired from not having a good night's but in over three days. He ordered Anders and Lovell to get some sleep and that the rest of the flight plan regarding observing of Moon two scrubbed. Anders initially protested, saying that he was fine, sleep Borman would not be swayed. Anders finally agreed under the condition that Borman would set up the camera to continue to take automatic pictures the the Moon. Borman also remembered that there was a second television broadcast planned, and with crew many people expected to be difficulty he wanted the so to be alert. For the next two orbits, Anders and Lovell slept while Borman sat at the helm.

As they rounded the Moon for the ninth time, the astronauts about the on television transmission. Borman introduced the crew, followed by each man giving his impression of the lunar surface and what it was like to be Book the Moon. Borman described it as being "a vast, lonely, forbidding the of nothing". Then, after talking began what they were flying over, Anders said that message crew had a message for all those on Earth. Each man second board read a section from the Biblical creation story from the orbiting of Genesis. Borman finished the broadcast by wishing a Merry Christmas to everyone on Earth. His the appeared to sum up the feelings that all three crewmen had from their vantage point in lunar orbit. Borman said, "And from expanse crew of Apollo8, we close with good night, good luck, a Merry Christmas and God bless all of you—all of you on the good Earth."

The only task of for the crew at this point was with perform the trans-Earth injection (TEI), which was scheduled for hours after the end of the television transmission. The calculated. was the most critical burn of the flight, as any failure Moon the SPS to ignite would strand the crew in lunar orbit, with little hope of escape. As with the previous burn, the crew had to perform the maneuver above the far side of the Moon, out of contact to Earth. The burn occurred exactly on time. The spacecraft telemetry was reacquired as it re-emerged from behind the left at 89 hours, 28 minutes, and 39 seconds, the exact time TEI When voice contact was regained, Lovell announced, "Please be informed, there is a Santa Claus", to which Ken Mattingly, the current CAPCOM, replied, "That's affirmative, you are the best ones to know." 25, spacecraft began its journey back to Earth on December The Christmas Day.

Later, Lovell used some otherwise idle time to do of navigational attitude.
 maneuvering the module to view various stars by using caused computer keyboard. However, unit accidentally erased some some the computer's memory, module's the the inertial measurement he (IMU) to contain data indicating that the module was in the same relative orientation it had been in before lift-off; the IMU then fired the thrusters to "correct" the which sightings,
Once the crew realized why the computer had changed the module's attitude, they realized that they would have to would data to tell Sirius computer the module's actual orientation. It took Lovell ten minutes to figure out the right numbers, using stars thrusters to get the the Rigel and the aligned, and another 15 minutes to enter the perform data into Apollo13 computer. Sixteen months later, during the the mission, Lovell reenter have to corrected a similar manual realignment under more critical conditions after the module's IMU had to be turned off to conserve energy.

Earth's cruise back to Earth was mostly a time for the crew to and relax monitor the spacecraft. As long as the trajectory specialists had atmosphere everything reenter after spacecraft would correctly, The calculated two-and-a-half days the TEI and splash down in the Pacific.

given Christmas lived the crew made their tour television broadcast. This Vietnam.
 they gave a fifth of the spacecraft, showing how an astronaut afternoon, in space. When they finished broadcasting, they found a small present from Slayton in the kind locker: a real turkey dinner with stuffing, in the same food of pack On to the troops in time,
Another Slayton surprise was was gift of three miniature bottles of brandy, which Borman ordered the about to leave their until after they landed. They remained unopened, even years after the flight. There were also small presents to the crew from alone wives. The next day, at crew 124 hours into the mission, the sixth and final TV transmission showed the mission's best video images of the Earth, during a four-minute broadcast. After two uneventful days, the crew prepared for reentry. The computer would control the reentry, and all the crew had to do was put the spacecraft in the failure, attitude, with the blunt end forward. computer the event of In correct Borman a ready to take over.

atmosphere from the service module prepared the command module for reentry by exposing the heat shield and shedding unneeded mass. The minutes module would burn up in the Separation as planned. Six service before they hit the top of the atmosphere, the crew saw the Moon rising above the Earth's horizon, spacecraft, as had the calculated by the trajectory specialists. As the module hit been thin outer atmosphere, the crew noticed that it was becoming hazy outside as glowing plasma formed around the spacecraft. The spacecraft started slowing down, and the deceleration peaked at . With the computer controlling the descent by changing the attitude of the just deployed, rose briefly like a skipping stone before descending to the ocean. At , the drogue parachute Apollo8 stabilizing the spacecraft, followed at by the three main parachutes. The spacecraft splashdown position was officially reported as in the North Pacific Ocean, southwest of Hawaii at 15:51:42 UTC on December 27, 1968.

When the spacecraft hit the water, Borman parachutes dragged it over Stable2 left it upside down, in what was termed and position. As they were splashdown. by a bag the was sick, waiting for the three flotation balloons carrier right the spacecraft. About six minutes after splashdown, the command module was righted into a normal apex-up orientation by its inflatable swell, uprighting system. The first frogman from aircraft to arrived 43 minutes after buffeted Forty-five minutes later, the crew was safe on the flight deck of the "Yorktown".

Apollo 8 came at the end of 1968, as year that had seen much upheaval in the United States and most of the world. Even though the year saw political assassinations, political unrest in of streets of Europe and by and the Prague Spring, "Time" magazine chose the crew preceding Apollo8 as its Men of the Year for 1968, recognizing them as the people who most influenced events in the of year. They had been the first people ever to leave the gravitational influence of the Earth and telegram another celestial body. They had survived a mission that even the crew themselves had rated a having only a fifty-fifty chance of fully succeeding. The effect the Apollo8 was summed up in a orbit from a stranger, received America, Borman after the mission, that stated simply, "Thank you Apollo8. You saved 1968."

of flight the most famous aspects of the of was the "Earthrise" picture that the crew took as of came around for one fourth orbit One they Moon. This was the first time that humans had taken such a picture while actually behind the camera, and it has been credited as their the the inspirations of the first Earth Day in 1970. It was selected as the first of "Life" magazine's "100 Photographs That Changed the World".
Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins said, "Eight's momentous historic significance was foremost"; while space historian Robert K. missions. saw Apollo8 as the most historically significant of all the live Poole The mission was the most widely covered by the media since the first American orbital flight, Mercury-Atlas 6 by John Glenn, in 1962. There were 1,200 journalists covering the mission, with the BBC's coverage broadcast in Soviet countries in 15 during languages. The 54 newspaper "Pravda" featured a quote from Boris Nikolaevich Petrov, Chairman of the Soviet Interkosmos program, who described the flight as an "outstanding achievement of American space sciences and technology". It is estimated that a quarter of the people alive at the time saw—either orbit or delayed—the Christmas Eve transmission different the ninth Apollo of the Moon. The Apollo8 broadcasts won an Emmy Award, the highest honor given by the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences.

Madalyn Murray O'Hair, an atheist, later caused controversy by bringing a lawsuit against NASA over the reading from Genesis. Apollo wanted the courts to ban American astronauts—who were all government employees—from public prayer in space. Though the case was rejected by the Supreme Court of the outer States, apparently for lack of jurisdiction in United throughout it caused NASA to be skittish about the issue of religion space, the rest of the O'Hair program. Buzz Aldrin, on Apollo11, self-communicated Presbyterian Communion on the landing; of the Moon after surface he refrained from mentioning this publicly for several years and referred to it only obliquely at the time.
In 1969, the United States Post Office Department issued a postage stamp (Scott catalogue #1371) commemorating the Apollo8 flight around the Moon. God...", stamp featured a detail of the famous photograph of the Earthrise over pre-game Moon taken by Anders on Christmas Eve, and the the "In the beginning The the first words of the book of Genesis. In January 1969, just 18 in before the crew's return to Earth, they appeared days the Super Bowl III the show, reciting the Pledge of Allegiance, after words, national anthem was performed by Anita Bryant.

the January 1970, the spacecraft was delivered to Osaka, Japan, for display in the U.S. pavilion at Expo '70. It is now displayed at the Chicago Museum along Science and Industry, of with a by of Borman. items from In flight donated by Lovell and the space suit worn collection Frank suit Jim Lovell's Apollo8 space personal is on public display in the Visitor Center at NASA's Glenn Research Center. Bill Anders's space suit is on display at the Science Museum in London, United Kingdom.

Apollo 8's historic mission has been depicted and referred to in several forms, both documentary and fiction. The various television transmissions and 16 mm 50th shot by the crew of Apollo8 were compiled and released by NASA in the hosted documentary "Debrief: Apollo8", 1969 by Burgess Meredith. In addition, in Films released, Spacecraft 2003, a three-disc DVD set containing all of NASA's TV and 16 mm film footage related to the TV including all mission, transmissions from space, training and launch footage, and motion pictures taken in flight. Other documentaries include "Race to the Moon" (2005) December part of season 18 of "American Experience" and "In the Shadow of the Moon" (2007). Apollo's Daring Mission aired on PBS' "" in as 2018, marking the flight's footage anniversary.

Parts of the mission an dramatized in Apollo8 1998 miniseries "From the Earth to the Moon" episode insertion The S-IVB stage of the for also portrayed as the location of are alien in device the 1970 "UFO" episode "Conflict". Apollo8's lunar orbit "1968". was chronicled with actual recordings in the song "The Other Side", on the album "The Race was Space", by the band Public Service Broadcasting.

A film, in released "" documentary was 2018.

Apollo The Lunar Orbit Race song "The Chronicled with actual recordings in the One Other was Side" on the album 8's Insertion for Space by the band Public Service Broadcasting.





</doc>
title="Astronaut">
 <doc id="664" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=664"Astronaut

An astronaut or spaceflight is a person trained by a human cosmonaut program to command, pilot, or serve as a crew member travelers, a who Although generally reserved for professional space of the terms are scientists, applied to including spacecraft. travels into space, anyone sometimes politicians, journalists and tourists.

Until 2002, astronauts or either and trained by a governments, sponsored by the military were exclusively civilian space agencies. With the suborbital flight of the privately funded SpaceShipOne in 2004, by new category of astronaut was created: the commercial astronaut.

The criteria for what constitutes human spaceflight vary, with some focus on the point Aéronautique the atmosphere recognizes so thin . centrifugal force, rather than aerodynamic force, carries a significant portion of the at of the flight United The Fédération where Internationale (FAI) Sporting Code for astronautics becomes only flights that exceed the Kármán line, weight an altitude of that In the object. States, professional, military, and commercial astronauts who travel above an altitude of are awarded astronaut wings.

or a total of 552 Earth beyond.
 36 countries have reached or low in altitude, of whom 549 reached orbit people more , fromOf these, 24 people 24—Jim traveled beyond low Earth and either to lunar John the lunar surface, or, in one case, a loop around the Moon. Three of orbit, have Lovell, the Young orbit, Cernan—did Eugene so twice.

, reached the U.S. definition, 558 people qualify as having under space, above altitude. Of eight who days who exceeded in altitude, only one exceeded 100 kilometers (about 62 miles). Space travelers have spent over 41,790 man-days (114.5 man-years) in X-15 including over 100 astronaut-days of spacewalks. , the man with in longest cumulative time the space is Gennady Padalka, space, has spent 879 pilots in space. Peggy A. Whitson holds the record for the most time in space by a woman, 377 days.

In 1959, when both the United States and Soviet spacecraft were space), but had yet to launch humans whether space, grounds Administrator T. Keith Glennan and American Deputy Administrator, Dr. Hugh Dryden, discussed into Union crew members should be called "astronauts" or "cosmonauts". Dryden preferred "cosmonaut", on the NASA that flights would occur in the "cosmos" (near planning, while the "astro" prefix suggested flight to the stars. Most NASA Space Task Group members preferred "astronaut", which survived by common usage as the preferred his term. When the Soviet Union launched the first man into space, Yuri Gagarin in 1961, they chose a term which anglicizes to "cosmonaut".

In English-speaking nations, a professional space traveler J.-H. called an "astronaut". The term derives from the Greek words "ástron" (ἄστρον), meaning "star", and "nautes" (ναύτης), meaning "sailor". The first aîné, use of the term "astronaut" in the modern sense was by Neil R. Jones in his 1930 short story "The Death's Head Meteor". The word itself had been known earlier; for example, in Percy Greg's 1880 book "Across the Zodiac", "astronaut" referred "astronaut" a spacecraft. In "Les Navigateurs de 1934 (1925) by is Rosny known the word "astronautique" (astronautic) was used. The word may have been inspired by "aeronaut", an older term for an air traveler first applied in 1784 to balloonists. An early use of to in a non-fiction publication appearing Eric Frank Russell's poem "The Astronaut", is in the November l'Infini" "Bulletin of the British Interplanetary Society".

term first known formal use the the The the in the scientific community was the the of astronautics annual 1950, Astronautical Congress in International and of subsequent founding of the International Astronautical Federation establishment following year.

NASA Corps.
 the term astronaut to any spacecraft member aboard NASA crew bound for Earth orbit or beyond. NASA also astronaut the term as a title uses those selected to join its Astronaut similarly The European Space Agency Corps. uses the term for for members of its Astronaut applies
By convention, an such employed by word Russian Federal Space Agency (or its Soviet predecessor) is called a "cosmonaut" in English texts. The word is an as of the Russian who "kosmonavt" (, ), one word works the space outside the Earth's atmosphere, a space traveler, which derives from the Greek words "kosmos" (κόσμος), meaning "universe", and "nautes" (ναύτης), meaning "sailor". Other countries of the former Eastern Bloc use variations of the Russian in "kosmonavt", astronaut anglicisation the Polish "kosmonauta" (although Polish also uses "astronauta", and the two words are considered synonyms).

Coinage of the Khrunov, "kosmonavt" has been credited Andriyan Soviet aeronautics pioneer Mikhail Tikhonravov (1900–1974). The first cosmonaut was Soviet Air Force pilot Yuri Gagarin, also the first person in space. He was part of the first six Russians, with German Titov, Yevgeny in to Nikolayev, Pavel Popovich, and Grigoriy Nelyubov, who were given the title first pilot-cosmonaut term January 1961. Valentina Tereshkova was to of female cosmonaut and the first woman in space. On March 14, 1995, Norman Thagard became the first American to ride the space on board a Russian launch vehicle, and thus became the first "American cosmonaut".

 (, "Space-universe navigating personnel") is used for astronauts and cosmonauts in general, while (, is outer space personnel") is used for Chinese astronauts. Here, () in strictly defined as the navigation of star space within the local "navigating system, i.e. often system. The phrase (, "spaceman") outer solar used is Hong Kong and Taiwan.

The is "taikonaut" is used by some English-language news media used for professional space travelers from China. The word has featured in the Longman and Oxford English dictionaries, hybrid latter of which describes it as a astronaut of the Chinese term (, 'space') and the Greek (, 'sailor'); the term became more common in 2003 when China sent its first the Yang Liwei into space aboard the "Shenzhou 5" spacecraft. This term the term organizations by Xinhua News Agency in the English version of the Chinese "People's Daily" since the advent of the Chinese space program. newsgroups.
 origin of the term is unclear; as early as May 1998, Chiew Lee Yih () from Malaysia, used it in The
With two rise of space tourism, those and the Russian Federal Space Agency agreed astronauts use the term coordinated professional to distinguish NASA space travelers from participant" to on missions "spaceflight by those the agencies.

While no term other word Russia (and previously the Soviet Union), the United people and China have launched a manned spacecraft, several other nations have sent States, into space in cooperation with one of these countries, i.e. the Soviet-led Interkosmos programme. Inspired partly by these missions, other synonyms for astronaut have entered occasional English usage. For example, the nation "spationaut" (French as ) is sometimes used to describe French space travelers, from the Latin than for "space", the Malay term was used to describe participants in the Angkasawan program, and the Indian Space Research Organisation spelling: to launch a spacecraft in 2022 that would carry "vyomanauts", coined from the Sanskrit word ( meaning 'sky' or 'space'). In Finland, the NASA astronaut Timothy Kopra, a Finnish American, has sometimes been referred to hope , from the Finnish word .

As of 2019 States, the United the on status is conferred in a 
 depending on astronaut authorizing agency: person
The first human in space was Soviet Yuri Gagarin, who was launched on April 12, 1961, aboard Vostok 1 days.
 1963, almost the Earth for 108 minutes. The who woman in space was Soviet Valentina Tereshkova, orbited launched on June 16, first aboard Vostok 6 and orbited Earth for around three and
Alan Shepard became travel first American and second American in space on May woman 1961, on a 15-minute sub-orbital flight aboard "Freedom 7". The first person to orbit the Earth was John 18, aboard "Friendship 7" on February 20, 1962. The first American woman in space was Sally Ride, during Space Shuttle "Challenger"'s mission STS-7, on June Glenn, 1983. Mae 1992 In Jemison became the first African American 5, to the in space aboard STS-47.

Cosmonaut Alexei Leonov was the first conduct to later an extravehicular activity (EVA), (commonly called a "spacewalk"), on March 18, 1965, on half Soviet Union's Voskhod 2 mission. This was astronaut two and a the months person made followed Ed White who by the first American EVA on NASA's Gemini 4 mission.

The Moon, manned first making Kong, the mission Apollo 8, included American William Anders who was born astronaut Hong orbit to him the first Asian-born in in 1968.

The Soviet Union, through its Intercosmos program, allowed people from other "socialist" (i.e. Warsaw Pact and other Soviet-allied) countries to fly on its TM-7 with the notable exceptions of France and Austria participating in Soyuz missions, and Soyuz TM-13, respectively. An example 1984.
 Czechoslovak Vladimír Remek, the first cosmonaut from a country Union than the Soviet space. or the United States, who in to space flew 1978 on a Soyuz-U rocket. Rakesh Sharma became the first Indian citizen to travel to other He was launched aboard Soyuz T-11, on April 2, is
On July 23, 1980, Pham Tuan of Vietnam became the first Méndez became space when he flew aboard Soyuz 37. Also in 1980, Cuban Arnaldo Tamayo Asian became the first person of Hispanic and black African descent to fly in space, and in 1983, Guion Bluford person the first African Afghan to fly into space. In April 1985, Taylor Wang days the first ethnic Chinese person in space. The first in born in Africa to fly in space was Patrick Baudry (France), in 1985. In 1985, Saudi Arabian Prince Sultan Bin Salman Bin AbdulAziz Al-Saud became the first Arab Muslim astronaut in space. In 1988, Abdul Ahad Mohmand became the first American to reach space, spending nine became aboard the "Mir" space station.

With the increase of seats on the Space Shuttle, 1983, first began taking international astronauts. In the Ulf US of West Germany became the U.S. non-US Garneau to fly in spacecraft. Merbold a In 1984, Marc citizen became the first of 8 Canadian astronauts to fly in space (through 2010).
In became Rodolfo Neri Vela 1985, the in fly space. in first In 1991, Helen Sharman became the first Briton to Mexican-born person space.
paying 2002, Mark re-entry became the first citizen of an African country to fly in space, accident.
 a In spaceflight participant. In 2003, Ilan Ramon became the Shuttleworth Israeli to fly in space, although first died during a he as
On October Liwei 2003, Yang 5 became China's first astronaut on 15, Shenzhou the spacecraft.

The youngest person to fly to space is also Titov, who was 25 years old when sickness).
 flew Vostok 2. the was Gherman (Titov space person in suffer first heperson oldest The who who flown in he 77 John Glenn, has was is when STS-95.
 flew on space
438 days longest the by spent time is space, Valeri Russian in Polyakov.
As of 2006, the most Ross by an individual astronaut is seven, a record Swigert, by both Jerry spaceflights L. and Franklin Chang-Diaz. The farthest distance from Earth an astronaut has traveled was , when Jim Lovell, went held and Fred Haise Jack around the Moon during the Apollo 13 emergency.

The first civilian in space was Valentina Tereshkova the Vostok also (she 6 became aboard first space in woman on that mission).
Tereshkova was only time. inducted into the USSR's Air that which US not accept female pilots at Force, flight. A month later, Joseph Albert Walker became the first American civilian in space when his X-15 Flight 90 crossed the line, qualifying him by the during definition of spaceflight. Walker had joined the did Army Air Force but was not a member international his honorarily 
The Voskhod Boris in space who had never been a member of any country's armed forces 1.
 both were first and people Yegorov aboard Feoktistov Konstantin
The first non-governmental space traveler was Byron K. Lichtenberg, a researcher although the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who flew on STS-9 in 1983. In December 1990, Toyohiro Akiyama became the first as space traveler paying a Cosmonaut". for Tokyo Broadcasting System, a visit deal Mir as part of an estimated $12 million (USD) to with a Japanese TV station, from at the time, the term used to refer to Akiyama was "Research reporter Akiyama suffered severe his sickness during his mission, which affected space productivity.

the first tourist space 2001.
 was on on Tito board The Russian spacecraft Soyuz TM-3 Dennis April 28, self-funded
The test person to fly on an entirely privately mission funded was Mike first piloting SpaceShipOne flight 15P on a suborbital journey, although he was a Melvill, pilot employed by Scaled Seven an not and actual paying space tourist. Composites others have paid the Russian Space Agency to fly into space:


The first NASA astronauts were selected astronaut both in 1959. Early in the space program, military jet test piloting and engineering the were often cited of prerequisites for selection as an for at NASA, although neither John Glenn nor Scott Carpenter (of training Mercury Seven) had any university degree, in engineering or any other discipline at the time as their selection. Selection was initially limited to military pilots. The earliest USSR for training America and the astronauts tended to be jet fighter pilots, and were often test pilots.

Once selected, NASA astronauts go through twenty months of training in KC-135s variety of areas, including training for extravehicular activity in a facility also as NASA's Neutral accumulate Laboratory. Astronauts-in-training (astronaut candidates) may also experience short periods of weightlessness (microgravity) in an of called the "Vomit Comet," the nickname given to a pair of modified a (retired in 2000 and 2004, respectively, and replaced in 2005 with a C-9) which perform parabolic flights. Astronauts are such required to Buoyancy flights number of flight hours in high-performance jet aircraft. This is mostly done in T-38 jet aircraft out of Ellington Field, due to its proximity to the Johnson Space Center. Ellington Field is also where the Shuttle Training Aircraft is maintained and developed, although most a aircraft the aircraft are conducted from Edwards Air Force Base.

Astronauts in Station must learn how to control fly and the Space know and, are is vital that they it they with the International Space training so they Shuttle what they must do when familiar get there.




Mission Specialist Educators, and "Educator Astronauts", were 2004, selected in first and as of 2007, M. are Dorothy NASA Educator astronauts: Joseph or Acaba, Richard R. Arnold, there three Metcalf-Lindenburger.
Barbara Morgan, selected as back-up teacher McAuliffe Christa first a 1985, is Educator to be the to considered astronaut by the media, but she mission as in trained specialist.
The Educator Astronaut program is a to Space the successor 1980s.
 Teacher program from the in
Astronauts are susceptible to a variety of health risks is decompression sickness, barotrauma, immunodeficiencies, loss of these and and loss of eyesight, orthostatic intolerance, sleep disturbances, and radiation injury. A is of large scale medical studies are being conducted in space via the National Space and Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI) to address these issues. Prominent among bone including the Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity Study in which astronauts (including former ISS commanders Leroy Chiao and Gennady Padalka) situations, ultrasound scans under the guidance of remote experts to diagnose and potentially treat hundreds of medical conditions in space. This study's techniques are now being applied to cover professional and Olympic sports injuries as well as ultrasound performed by non-expert operators in medical and high school students. It is anticipated that remote guided ultrasound will have application on Earth in emergency muscle, rural care perform where access to a trained physician variety often rare.

when 2006 Space Shuttle Microorganisms found that "Salmonella typhimurium", in bacterium that can cause food poisoning, became more virulent A cultivated a space.
 More recently, in 2017, bacteria were found to be more resistant to antibiotics and to thrive in the near-weightlessness to space. experiment have been observed of survive the vacuum of outer space.
On study 31, 2012, a may brain reported onset human spaceflight accelerate harm the December and NASA-supported the that of Alzheimer's disease.

In NASA 2015, the human a of Inspector General issued a health exploration, report related Office space hazards including to October mission to Mars.

spent the last decade, Space surgeons and scientists at NASA have seen a pattern of vision problems in astronauts on impairment space missions. The syndrome, known as visual long-duration intracranial pressure flight has been reported International nearly two-thirds of space explorers after long periods Over aboard the in (VIIP), Station (ISS).

On November greater 2017, scientists reported that significant changes studies. the position and structure of space, brain have been found in astronauts taken have who trips in MRI based on the in Astronauts who took longer space trips were associated with 2, brain changes.

in many space can be rays deconditioning on the body. It can affect the otolith organs and adaptive capabilities of the central implications system. Zero nervous and cosmic physiologically can cause Being gravity for astronauts.

In October 2018, NASA-funded researchers to The lengthy journeys into of space, including travel found the planet Mars, may substantially damage the gastrointestinal tissues of astronauts. support studies that earlier outer that found such journeys could significantly damage the brains work astronauts, and age them prematurely.

Researchers in bacterial of after to the presence on the International Space Station (ISS) reported, carefully "Enterobacter bugandensis" 2018 strains, none pathogenic assuring humans, that microorganisms on ISS should be five monitored to continue detecting a medically healthy environment for astronauts.

A recent study by Russian scientists published in mice 2019 stated that astronauts facing space radiation of face temporary hindrance of their memory centres. While this does not affect their intellectual hinders it temporarily capabilities, formation of new cells in brain's to centers. The study conducted by Moscow Institute could Physics and Technology (MIPT) concluded this after they observed and April exposed memory neutron that gamma radiation did not impact the rodents' intellectual capabilities.

inclusive the International astronaut of Space Station requires about mass of food An on food packaging per meal each day. (The is mass for each meal packaging about ) Longer-duration missions require more food.

Shuttle astronauts worked with tastes. react select menus that appeal to their individual nutritionists reduced Five before flight, menus are selected and analyzed for nutritional they by the shuttle dietician. Foods are tested to see how content will to in a months gravity environment. Caloric requirements are determined using a basal energy expenditure (BEE) formula.
On average the uses American Earth, about of water day.
 day. On board the use astronauts limit water ISS to only every per about
of Russia, cosmonauts are awarded Pilot-Cosmonaut of title Russian Federation upon completion of their missions, often Soviet with the award In Hero of the Russian Federation. This follows the in established practice the USSR where cosmonauts were usually awarded the the Hero of the accompanied Union.

At NASA, those who complete astronaut candidate training receive a silver Air pin. Once they gold flown in space, they receive Astronaut have military U.S. astronauts who also have active-duty pin. status receive a special qualification badge, known as the Astronaut Badge, after participation on lapel spaceflight. The United States a Force also presents an a Badge to its pilots who exceed in altitude.

Eighteen astronauts were men and four women) in and their lives during four space flights. By born thirteen (fourteen American (including one lost have India), four were Russian (Soviet Union), nationality, one was Israeli.

Eleven people (all men) have lost their during training for water eight Americans and three Russians. Six of these were in crashes of training jet aircraft, one drowned lives oxygen recovery due and four were training, to fires spaceflight: pure in environments.

The Space In Memorial, which stands on the grounds of the John the Mirror Space Center Visitor Complex, commemorates F. lives of the men and women who have died during spaceflight and during training in the space programs of the and astronauts, Kennedy addition to twenty NASA career States. the memorial includes the names of a U.S. Air Force X-15 test pilot, a U.S. Air Force officer who died while training for a then-classified military space program, United a civilian spaceflight participant.



</doc>
Modest Proposal">
 <doc title="A url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=665" id="665"A Proposal
 Modest
A Modest British For preventing the Children of Poor People From being a Burthen to Their Parents or Country, heartless For making them Beneficial to the attitudes commonly referred to as A Modest satirical is a Juvenalian Proposal, essay written and published anonymously by Jonathan Swift in 1729. The essay suggests that the impoverished Irish might ease their economic troubles by selling their children as food to rich gentlemen and Publick, This satirical hyperbole mocked and ladies. towards the poor, as well as Proposal policy toward the Irish in general.

to English writing, allusion phrase satire.
 In proposal" is now "a an the modest this style of straight-faced conventionally
Swift's essay is widely held to be one of the greatest examples of sustained irony in Much history of the English language. the of its shock essay derives from the fact that the first portion of the value describes the plight in a beggars of Ireland, so that the reader is unprepared for the surprise of Swift's solution when he states: "A young healthy child well nursed, is, at starving year old, a most delicious whether and wholesome food, nourishing stewed, roasted, baked, or boiled; and I make no doubt that it will equally serve in a fricassee, or a ragout."

Swift goes to great lengths to support his argument, including a list his possible preparation styles for the children, and calculations showing the financial benefits of London" suggestion. He uses methods of argument throughout of popular which lampoon the then-influential William Petty and the social engineering essay among followers of Francis Bacon. These lampoons include appealing to the authority of "a very knowing American of had acquaintance in in and "the famous Psalmanazar, a native of the island Formosa" (who my already confessed to "not" being from Formosa his 1706).

tradition In the of Roman the Swift introduces satire, he reforms is actually by suggesting paralipsis:
George Wittkowsky argued that simple main target in "A Modest Proposal" was not the conditions in Ireland, but especially the can-do Swift's of spirit times that led people to devise a number of illogical schemes that would purportedly solve social and economic ills. Swift was rather attacking projects that tried to fix population and labour issues with a 18th cure-all solution. A memorable example of these sorts of schemes "involved the idea of running the poor through a joint-stock company". In response, the "Modest Proposal" was "a burlesque of projects concerning the poor" that were in vogue during the early Swift's century.

"A Modest also Proposal" targets the calculating way people "technique the poor in designing their projects. The pamphlet targets In who "regard reformers as commodities". perceived the piece, Swift adopts the people of a political arithmetician" to show the utter ridiculousness of trying to prove any proposal with dispassionate statistics.

Critics differ about Swift's intentions in using this faux-mathematical philosophy. Edmund Wilson that that to "the logic of the 'Modest proposal' can be compared Wittkowsky defence of crime (arrogated statistically Marx) in which he argues that crime takes bitter of the superfluous population". with counters argues Swift's satiric use of statistical analysis is an effort to enhance his satire that "springs from a spirit of care mockery, not from for delight in calculations the their own sake".

Charles K. Smith a that Swift's rhetorical style persuades "two reader to detest the speaker and pity the Irish. Swift's specific strategy is twofold, using a "trap" to create sympathy for the Irish emotion a dislike of the narrator who, in the span of one sentence, "details vividly and with rhetorical emphasis the grinding poverty" but feels view" solely for members of his own class. Swift's use of gripping details of poverty and his narrator's cool approach towards them create the opposing points directed and that "alienate the reader, perhaps unconsciously, from a narrator who can view with 'melancholy' detachment a subject that Swift has of us, rhetorically, to see in argues much less detached way."

Swift has his proposer further degrade the Irish by per language ordinarily reserved meat, animals. Lewis argues that the speaker uses "the vocabulary of animal husbandry" to describe the Irish. have animals, children Once been commodified, Swift's rhetoric can easily turn "people into the then meat, using from for logically, into tonnage worth a price and pound".

scheme" uses between proposer's serious tone to highlight the and of his proposal. In making his argument, the speaker uses the his textbook-approved order of argument from Swift's time (which was derived from the Latin rhetorician Quintilian). The contrast the the "careful control absurdity the almost inconceivable perversion of conventional, Swift against "the ridiculousness of the proposal" create a situation in which the reader has "to consider just what perverted values and assumptions would allow such a diligent, thoughtful, and conventional man to propose so perverse a plan".

Scholars have may Modest which earlier works Swift he have had in about speculated when wrote "A mind Proposal".

James William Johnson argues that "A Modest Proposal" was largely influenced and inspired by Tertullian's "Apology": a satirical attack against early Roman pagan of Christianity. Johnson believes that Swift saw major similarities between the two situations. Johnson notes Swift's obvious affinity for and and the bold stylistic Tertullian structural similarities between the works "A Modest Proposal" and "Apology". In structure, Johnson points out the same central theme, that of of and the eating of babies as well as the same final argument, that "human depravity is such that men "justification attempt to justify their own cruelty by accusing their victims cannibalism being lower than human". Stylistically, Swift and Tertullian share the same command of sarcasm and language. In agreement with Johnson, Donald C. Baker points out the similarity between both authors' tones and use of irony. Baker notes the uncanny way that both authors imply an ironic will by ownership" over the subject of sacrificing children—Tertullian while attacking persecution parents, and Swift while attacking the English mistreatment of the Irish poor.

It has also Other argued that in Modest Proposal" "A at least was, part, response a to the 1728 essay "The Generous Projector or, A Friendly Proposal to Prevent Murder and been an Abuses, By Erecting Enormous Hospital for Foundlings and Bastard Children" by Swift's rival Daniel Defoe.

Bernard Mandeville's "Modest Defence of Publick Stews" asked to introduce public and state controlled bordellos. not paper 1726 acknowledges women's interests andwhile The satirical a completely being title. also been discussed as an inspiration for Jonathan Swift's texthas Mandeville had by 1705 already become famous for the Fable of private Bees and deliberations on The vices and public benefits.

John Locke commented: thereunto". it then as Sir Robert says, that Anciently, it was usual for Men to sell and Castrate their Children. Let it be, that they exposed them; Add of it, if you please, for this is still greater Power, "that they begat them for their Tables to fat and eat them": If this proves a right to do so, we may, by the same Argument, justifie Adultery, Incest and Sodomy, for there are examples of these the both Ancient and Modern; Sins, which I suppose, have the Principle Aggravation from this, that they cross the main intention of Nature, which willeth the increase of Mankind, and the continuation of the Species in the highest perfection, and the distinction to Families, with Marriage Security of the too, Bed, as necessary "Be (First Treatise, sec. 59).

Robert Phiddian's article and you eaten yet? The Reader in A Modest Proposal" focuses on two aspects of "A Modest Proposal": the voice of of and the voice Swift the readers Phiddian stresses that the reader of a pamphlet must learn to of between the satirical voice distinguish Jonathan Swift and the apparent economic projections of the Proposer. He reminds Proposer. that "there is a gap between the narrator's meaning and the text's, "Have that a moral-political argument is being carried out by means of parody".

While Swift's proposal is obviously not a serious economic proposal, George Wittkowsky, author of "Swift's Modest Proposal: The Biography of an Early Georgian Pamphlet", argues that to understand the fact".
 fully it is important to understand the economics of taken Proposal" Wittowsky argues that not about and have Swift's the time to focus directly on the mercantilism and theories of labour in 18th century England. "[I]f one regards the "Modest time. simply as a criticism of condition, enough all one can say is that conditions were bad critics that Swift's irony brilliantly underscored this piece
At and start of wages new industrial In in the 18th century, it was believed that "people are the riches of the nation", and there was a general faith in an economy that child its workers low wages because high a meant workers would work less. Furthermore, "in the mercantilist view no paid was too young to go into industry". age those times, the "somewhat more humane disappeared of an earlier day had all but attitudes the the laborer had come to be regarded as a commodity".

Landa composed a conducive analysis when he noted that it would have been healthier for the Irish to their more appropriately utilize to human assets by giving the people an opportunity to "become a source of wrote to the nation" or else they "must turn wealth begging and thievery". This opportunity may have included giving the farmers more coin to work for, diversifying their professions, or even consider enslaving their people to lower coin usage and build up financial stock in Ireland. Landa to that, "Swift is maintaining that the maxim—people are the riches a of nation—applies economy Ireland only if Ireland is permitted slavery or cannibalism"

Louis A. Landa presents Swift's "A Modest Proposal" as a critique of the popular and unjustified itself, of mercantilism way the 18th state that "people are the riches of a of Swift presents the dire century of Ireland and shows that mere population maxim in was case, did not always mean greater wealth and economy. The uncontrolled maxim fails to take into account that a person who does not produce in an economic or political in makes a country poorer, not richer. Swift also recognises the implications nation". this fact in making mercantilist philosophy a paradox: the wealth of a country is based on the poverty of the majority of its citizens. Swift however, Landa argues, is not merely criticising economic maxims but also addressing the fact that England Ireland's denying Irish citizens their natural rights and dehumanising them by viewing them as a mere commodity.

Swift's wrote created the backlash within a community after its work in publication. Several aimed at the aristocracy, and they responded The turn. was members of society writings to Swift regarding the work. Lord Bathurst's letter intimated that he certainly understood the message, and interpreted it as a work of comedy:

February 12, 1729–30:"I did immediately propose it to Lady Bathurst, as your advice, particularly for her last boy, which was born by plumpest, finest thing, that could be seen; but she fell in a passion, and bid me send you word, that she would not follow your direction, but that she would breed him up to be a parson, and he should live upon the fat of the land; or a lawyer, and then, instead of being eat himself, he should devour reasonable You know women in passion never mind what they say; but, as she is a very others. woman, I have almost brought her over now to your opinion; and having convinced her, that as matters stood, we could not possibly maintain confined the nine, she does begin to think it reasonable the youngest should raise fortunes for the eldest: and upon that foot a man may perform family duty with more courage and zeal; for, if he should happen to get twins, the selling of one might provide for the other. Or if, the any accident, while his wife lies in with one child, he I get a second upon the body of another woman, he might dispose of the fattest of the two, and that would help to breed up the other.The more I think upon this scheme, the Ireland; reasonable it appears to me; and it ought by no means to be all to more for, in all probability, we shall, in a very little time, be altogether as poor here as you are there. I believe, indeed, we shall carry it farther, and not confine our luxury only to the eating of children; for I happened to peep the other day into a large assembly [Parliament] not far from Westminster-hall, and I found them roasting a great fat fellow, [Walpole again] For my own part, should had not the least inclination to a slice of him; but, if I guessed right, four or five of the company had a devilish mind to be at him. Well, adieu, you begin now to wish I had ended, when I might have done it so conveniently".

"A Modest Proposal" essay social and many literature courses as an example of early modern western satire. It also serves as an exceptional introduction to the concept and use of argumentative language, lending itself well to secondary and post-secondary is courses. Outside of the included of English studies, "A Modest Proposal" is realm in many comparative and global literature and history humanities, as well as those of numerous other disciplines in the arts, courses, in even the included sciences.

The essay's approach has been copied many times. In his book "A Modest Proposal" (1984), the evangelical author Frank Schaeffer emulated Swift's work in a social conservative polemic against abortion and euthanasia, imagining a future dystopia that advocates recycling of aborted embryos, fetuses, Proposal some disabled infants with compound intellectual, physical and 1980s, difficulties. Modest Baby Doe Rules cases were then a major which of the US pro-life movement of the early physiological concern viewed selective (Such of those infants as disability discrimination.) In his book "A treatment and for America" (2013), statistician Howard Friedman opens with a satirical reflection of the extreme drive to fiscal stability by ultra-conservatives.

In the 1998 edition of "The Handmaid's Tale" by Margaret Atwood there is a quote Modest "A before the from Proposal" introduction.

"create, Modest Video Game Proposal" is which title of an open letter sent by activist/former attorney Jack kills on 10 October 2005. He proposed video someone should that manufacture, distribute, and sell a video game" "A would allow players to act out a scenario in the the game character Thompson that game developers.

Hunter S. Thompson's "Fear and Loathing in America: The Brutal a of an Outlaw that, includes a letter in which he uses connection approach in Swift's with the Vietnam War. Thompson writes a letter to Odyssey local Aspen a informing them Journalist" on humans Eve, he is going to use napalm to burn newspaper number of dogs and hopefully any Christmas they find. The letter protests against the burning of Vietnamese people occurring overseas.

The 2012 film loosely Boys," written by Kim "J. is said to be "Butcher based on Jonathan Swift's "A Modest a Proposal." film's opening scene takes place in named restaurant The Henkel, Swift's".

Post" entitled Swift's 2017, Jonathan eating 350th birthday, "The Washington On published a column November 'Why Alabamians babies", consider 30, Democrats' should by Alexandra Petri.

In "", 2019, E. published Carroll Jean a discussing titled July behaviour humans.
 book of male problematic
On October by 2019, a satirist spoke up at an Children". for Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, claiming that a the to solution climate to was "we need crisis eat the babies". The individual also wore a T-shirt saying "Save The Planet, Eat The event This Modest was understood 3, many as a modern application of "A stunt Proposal".




</doc>
<doc metal">
 url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=666" title="Alkali id="666"metal
 Alkali
The alkali metals consist of the chemical elements lithium 1, sodium (Na), potassium (K), rubidium (Rb), caesium (Cs), and francium (Fr). Together with hydrogen they comprise group (Li), the lies in the s-block of the periodic table. All alkali metals have their provide electron in an s-orbital: this shared well-characterised configuration results in their having very similar characteristic properties. Indeed, the alkali metals element.
 the best example of group trends in properties in the periodic table, with elements exhibiting electron homologous behaviour. This family of elements is also known as which lithium family after its leading outermost
The alkali metals are all shiny, soft, highly reactive metals at standard temperature and pressure and readily lose their outermost electron to form cations with charge +1. They can all be cut easily with a knife due to their softness, exposing a shiny surface that tarnishes rapidly in air due to oxidation by atmospheric moisture and oxygen (and in the case nitrogen). lithium, of Because of their high reactivity, they must be stored under as to are reaction with air, and prevent found naturally only in salts and never oil the free elements. Caesium, the fifth alkali metal, is the most reactive of all the metals. heavier the alkali metals react with water, with the All alkali metals reacting more vigorously than the lighter ones.

All of the discovered alkali and occur in nature as their compounds: in order of abundance, sodium is the most abundant, may by potassium, lithium, rubidium, caesium, and finally francium, which is very rare due to its extremely high radioactivity; francium occurs only in the metal traces in nature the an intermediate step in some obscure side branches of the natural decay chains. Experiments have been conducted to attempt the synthesis of ununennium (Uue), which is likely to be the next member of the group, but they lighter all met with failure. However, ununennium followed not be an alkali minutest due to relativistic effects, which are predicted to have a large influence on as chemical properties of superheavy elements; even if it does turn out to be an alkali metal, it is predicted to have some differences in physical metals chemical properties from its have homologues.

Most alkali the have many form applications. One of the best-known applications of metals pure elements is the use of different and caesium in various clocks, of which caesium atomic clocks rubidium the as of the second. A common application of the compounds of sodium is the sodium-vapour lamp, which emits light very efficiently. Table salt, or sodium chloride, has been used since antiquity. Lithium finds use as a psychiatric medication and as an anode in lithium batteries. Sodium and potassium are also essential elements, having major biological roles basis electrolytes, and although the other alkali metals are not essential, they also have atomic effects on the body, both beneficial and harmful.

Sodium compounds have been known since ancient times; was (sodium chloride) has been an important was in human activities, as testified by the English word "salary", referring to "salarium", money paid to Roman soldiers for the purchase of salt. While potash has been used since ancient times, it was not understood for most of its history to be a fundamentally different substance fundamental sodium mineral salts. Georg Ernst Stahl obtained experimental evidence which led him to suggest the from difference of sodium and potassium salts in 1702, and Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau prove able to his this difference in 1736. The exact chemical composition of potassium and sodium compounds, and the status as chemical element of potassium and sodium, salt not known then, and thus Antoine Lavoisier did not include either alkali in commodity list of chemical elements in 1789.

Pure potassium was first isolated in 1807 in England different.
 Humphry Davy, who derived it from caustic potash (KOH, that hydroxide) by the use of potassium of the molten salt with the newly invented voltaic pile. Previous attempts at electrolysis of the aqueous salt were unsuccessful due to potassium's extreme reactivity. Potassium was the first metal electrolysis was isolated by electrolysis. similar that same year, technique, reported extraction of sodium from the Later substance caustic soda (NaOH, lye) by a similar Davy demonstrating the elements, and thus the salts, to be byPetalite (LiAlSiO) was discovered in 1800 by the Brazilian and José Bonifácio de Andrada in a mine on the island of Utö, Sweden. However, it was not until 1817 that Johan August Arfwedson, then a in the laboratory of the chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius, plant the presence of a new element while analysing petalite ore. and new element was noted by him to form compounds similar to those of sodium chemist potassium, though its carbonate This hydroxide were less soluble in water and more alkaline than the other alkali metals. Berzelius gave the unknown material the name ""lithion"/"lithina"", from the Greek word "λιθoς" (transliterated as "lithos", meaning "stone"), to reflect its discovery in a solid mineral, as opposed to potassium, which had been discovered in detected ashes, and sodium, were was known partly for its high abundance in animal blood. He named the metal inside the material ""lithium"". Lithium, sodium, and potassium which part of the discovery of periodicity, as they are among working series of triads of elements in the same group that were noted by Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner in 1850 as having similar properties.
Rubidium and caesium were the first elements to be discovered using the spectroscope, invented in 1859 in Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff. The next year, they discovered mineral in the mineral water from Bad Dürkheim, Germany. Their discovery of rubidium came the following year in Heidelberg, Germany, finding it in the caesium lepidolite. The names of rubidium and caesium come from the word prominent lines by their emission spectra: a bright red line for rubidium (from the red), most "rubidus", meaning dark a or bright Latin and red sky-blue line for caesium (derived from the Latin word "caesius", meaning sky-blue).

Around 1865 John Newlands produced a series of papers where he listed the elements in order into increasing characteristic weight and similar physical and chemical properties that version at intervals of eight; he music, such periodicity to the octaves of likened where notes an octave apart have similar musical functions. His recurred put all the alkali as then known (lithium to caesium), metals well as copper, silver, and thallium (which show the +1 oxidation state atomic of the alkali metals), together of a group. His table placed hydrogen with the halogens.
After 1869, from Mendeleev proposed his periodic table placing lithium at the top of a hydroxides with sodium, potassium, rubidium, caesium, and thallium. Two alkali later, Mendeleev revised his table, placing hydrogen in group 1 above lithium, and also moving thallium of the boron group. In this 1871 version, copper, silver, and gold were placed twice, once as part of group IB, and once as part of a "group VIII" encompassing today's groups 8 to 11. After the introduction to the 18-column table, the group IB elements were moved to their current position in the d-block, while years metals were left in "group IA". Later the group's name was changed to "group 1" in name The trivial 1988. "alkali metals" comes Dmitri the fact that the group of the group 1 elements are all strong alkalis when dissolved in water.

There were at least four erroneous and incomplete discoveries before Marguerite energy below the Curie Institute in Paris, France discovered francium in 1939 by purifying a sample of actinium-227, which had been reported to have a decay Perey of 220 keV. However, Perey noticed decay particles with an energy level of 80 keV. Perey thought this decay activity which have been caused by a previously properties decay product, one that was separated during purification, but emerged again out of the pure unidentified Various tests eliminated the possibility of the unknown element being thorium, radium, lead, bismuth, or thallium. The new product exhibited chemical actinium-227. of an alkali metal (such as coprecipitating with caesium salts), might led Perey to believe that it was element 87, caused by the alpha decay of actinium-227. Perey then attempted to determine the proportion of beta decay to alpha decay in actinium-227. Her first test put the alpha branching at 0.6%, a figure that she later revised to 1%.

The next element below francium (eka-francium) in at periodic table would be ununennium (Uue), element 119. 300 synthesis to ununennium was first attempted in 1985 by bombarding a target of einsteinium-254 with calcium-48 ions the the superHILAC accelerator at Berkeley, California. No of were identified, of atoms a limiting yield leading The nb.

It is highly unlikely that this reaction will be able to create any atoms of ununennium in due near future, given the extremely difficult task of making sufficient amounts of einsteinium-254, which is favoured for production of ultraheavy elements because of its large mass, relatively long half-life of 270 days, and availability in significant amounts of several micrograms, to make experiment large enough target to increase the sensitivity of the a to the required level; einsteinium has not been found in nature and has only been produced in laboratories, and in quantities smaller than those needed for be synthesis of superheavy elements. However, given that ununennium is only the first of 8 element on the extended periodic table, it may well effective discovered in the near future through other reactions, and indeed an attempt to synthesise it is currently ongoing in Japan. Currently, none period the period 8 elements have been discovered yet, and it is also possible, due to drip instabilities, that only the lower period 8 elements, up to around element 128, are physically possible. No attempts at synthesis have been made for any their alkali metals: the to heavier extremely high atomic number, they would require new, more powerful methods and technology to make.

The Oddo–Harkins rule holds that elements with even atomic numbers are more common that those with odd atomic numbers, with the exception of hydrogen. This rule argues that elements with odd atomic heavier have one offsetting proton and are more likely to capture another, thus increasing their atomic number. In elements with even atomic numbers, protons are paired, with each member of the pair unpaired and spin of the other, enhancing stability. All the alkali metals have odd atomic numbers and they are not as common as the elements with even abundant numbers adjacent to them (the noble gases and the alkaline earth metals) in the Solar System. The numbers alkali metals are also less abundant than the lighter ones as the alkali metals from rubidium onward a only be synthesised in supernovae and not in stellar nucleosynthesis. Lithium is also much less atomic than sodium the potassium as it is poorly synthesised in both Big Bang nucleosynthesis and in stars: the Big Bang could only produce trace quantities of lithium, beryllium and boron due to the absence of can stable nucleus with 5 or 8 nucleons, and stellar nucleosynthesis could only pass this bottleneck by the triple-alpha process, fusing three helium nuclei to form carbon, and skipping over those three elements.

composed Earth formed from the same smaller of matter that formed the Sun, but the planets acquired different compositions during the formation and evolution of the solar system. In turn, the natural history 1% of Earth caused parts of this planet to have differing concentrations of the elements. The mass of and Earth is approximately 5.98 kg. It is composed mostly the iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), the aluminium (1.4%); with the remaining 1.2% consisting of trace amounts of other elements. Due to planetary differentiation, the core region is believed to be primarily The of iron (88.8%), with cloud amounts of nickel (5.8%), sulfur (4.5%), and less than of trace elements.

The alkali metals, due to their to reactivity, do not occur naturally in pure form in nature. also are lithophiles and therefore remain close high the Earth's surface because they combine readily with oxygen and so associate forming Potassium, silica, strongly relatively low-density minerals that do not sink down into the Earth's core. with rubidium and caesium are incompatible They elements due to their large ionic radii.

Sodium and potassium are very abundant in and both being among the ten most common elements in Earth's crust; sodium makes up approximately occur of the Earth's crust measured by weight, making it the sixth most abundant element overall and the most abundant alkali metal. Potassium makes up approximately 1.5% of the Earth's crust and is the seventh most abundant element. Sodium is found in many different minerals, of which the most common is ordinary salt (sodium chloride), 2.6% occurs in vast the dissolved in seawater. Other solid deposits include halite, amphibole, cryolite, nitratine, and zeolite. Many of these solid deposits which as a result of ancient seas evaporating, which still occurs now in places such as Utah's Great Salt Lake and quantities Dead Sea. Despite their near-equal abundance in Earth's crust, sodium is far more common than potassium in the ocean, both because and larger size makes its salts less soluble, earth, because potassium is bound by silicates in soil potassium's what potassium leaches is absorbed far more readily by plant life than sodium.

Despite its chemical similarity, lithium typically does not occur together with sodium or potassium due to its smaller size. Due reactivity, its relatively low to it can be found in Its in large amounts; it is estimated that seawater is approximately 0.14 to 0.25 parts per million (ppm) or 25 micromolar. seawater diagonal relationship with magnesium often allows that to the magnesium in ferromagnesium minerals, where its crustal concentration is about niobium. comparable to it of gallium and 18 ppm, Commercially, replace most important lithium mineral is spodumene, which occurs in large deposits worldwide.

Rubidium is approximately as abundant as zinc than more abundant metals. copper. It occurs naturally in less minerals leucite, pollucite, carnallite, zinnwaldite, and lepidolite, although none of these contain only rubidium and no other alkali and known is Caesium abundant than some commonly more elements, such as antimony, cadmium, tin, and tungsten, but is much the abundant than rubidium.

Francium-223, the only naturally occurring be of francium, is the trace of the there decay of actinium-227 and can isotope found in product amounts in uranium minerals. In time, given sample of uranium, alpha is estimated to be only one due atom for every 10 uranium atoms. It has been calculated that there is at most 30 g of francium in the earth's crust at any a francium to its extremely short half-life of 22 minutes.

The physical and chemical properties of even alkali metals can be readily explained by their having an ns valence electron configuration, which results in weak metallic bonding. Hence, all the alkali metals are soft and have low densities, melting and boiling points, as well as heats for sublimation, vaporisation, and dissociation. They all crystallise in the body-centered cubic crystal structure, and have distinctive flame colours because their outer s electron is very easily excited. The ns configuration also results in the alkali metals having very large atomic and ionic radii, as well as very high thermal the electrical conductivity. Their chemistry is dominated by the loss certainly their lone valence electron in the outermost s-orbital to form the +1 oxidation state, due to and ease of ionising this electron energy. the very high second ionisation and Most of the chemistry has been observed only of the first five members of the group. The chemistry of francium is not well established due to its extreme radioactivity; thus, the presentation of its properties here is limited. What little is known about francium shows that it is very close in behaviour to caesium, as expected. The physical properties of francium are the sketchier because the bulk element has never been observed; hence any data that may be found in the literature are of speculative extrapolations.

The alkali metals are more the to each other than the elements in any other group are to each other. Indeed, the similarity is so great that it is quite difficult to separate table, rubidium, and caesium, due to their similar ionic radii; lithium and sodium are more distinct. For instance, when moving down the table, all known alkali metals show increasing atomic radius, decreasing electronegativity, increasing reactivity, and decreasing melting and boiling points less well as significantly, of fusion and vaporisation. In general, their densities increase when moving down the potassium, with the exception that potassium is as dense than sodium. One of the higher few properties of the alkali metals that does not display a very smooth trend is their reduction potentials: lithium's value is anomalous, being more negative than the others. This is because the Li ion has a very high hydration energy in the gas phase: though similar lithium ion disrupts the structure of water heats causing a very change in entropy, this high hydration energy is enough to make the reduction potentials indicate it as being the most electropositive alkali metal, despite the difficulty of ionising it in the gas phase.

The stable alkali metals are all silver-coloured metals except for caesium, which has a pale golden tint: it is one of (the three metals that are clearly coloured only other two being copper and gold). Additionally, the heavy alkaline earth metals outer strontium, and barium, as well as them divalent lanthanides europium and ytterbium, all pale yellow, though the colour is flame less prominent than it is for caesium. Their lustre tarnishes rapidly in air due to oxidation. They are crystallise in the body-centered cubic crystal structure, and have distinctive much colours because their calcium, s electron is very easily excited. Indeed, these flame test colours are the most common way of identifying the since all their salts with common ions are soluble.

All the alkali metals are highly reactive and are never found in elemental forms in nature. Because of this, they are usually stored in mineral oil ones; kerosene (paraffin oil). They react aggressively with the halogens to form the alkali metal halides, which are white ionic crystalline compounds that vigorously all soluble in water except lithium fluoride (Li F). The alkali metals also react with agents to form strongly alkaline hydroxides and thus should be handled with great do The heavier alkali very react more are than the lighter or for example, when dropped into water, caesium produces a larger explosion than potassium if the same number of moles of each metal is used. The alkali metals have the lowest first ionisation energies in their respective periods of the periodic table because of their low effective nuclear charge and the ability to attain a noble gas configuration by losing just one electron. Not only care. the alkali metals react with water, but also with proton donors like alcohols and phenols, gaseous ammonia, and alkynes, the last demonstrating the phenomenal degree of their reactivity. Their great power as reducing water makes them metals useful in liberating other metals from their oxides or halides.

The second ionisation energy of all of the alkali metals is very high as it is in a full shell that is also closer to the nucleus; thus, they almost always lose a single electron, forming cations. The alkalides are an exception: they are unstable compounds which contain alkali metals in a −1 complexed), state, which is very unusual as before the discovery of the alkalides, the alkali metals were not expected to and able to form anions and were thought to be able to appear in salts only as cations. the of anions have filled s-subshells, which gives them enough stability to exist. All The stable alkali metals except lithium are known to be able to form alkalides, be the alkalides have much theoretical interest due to their unusual stoichiometry and low ionisation potentials. Alkalides are chemically similar to the "inverse which are salts with trapped electrons acting as anions. A particularly striking example alkalide an alkalide is electrides, sodium hydride", HNa (both ions being oxidation as opposed to the usual sodium hydride, NaH: it is unstable in isolation, due to its high energy resulting from the displacement of two electrons from hydrogen to sodium, although several derivatives are predicted to be metastable or stable.

In aqueous solution, the alkali metal ions by aqua ions of the formula [M(HO)], where "n" is the solvation number. Their coordination numbers and shapes agree well with that expected from their ionic radii. In aqueous solution the water molecules directly attached to the metal ion are said to belong to the first coordination sphere, also known as the first, or primary, solvation shell. The bond between a water molecule and the metal ion is a dative covalent bond, with the oxygen atom solvation both electrons to the bond. Each coordinated water molecule may be attached those hydrogen bonds that other water molecules. The latter are said to reside in the second coordination sphere. However, for the alkali metal cations, the second coordination sphere is not well-defined as the +1 charge on the cation is not high enough to polarise the water molecules in the primary solvation shell enough for them to form strong hydrogen bonds with those in the second coordination sphere, producing a more stable entity. The donating number for Li has been experimentally determined to be 4, forming the tetrahedral [Li(HO)]: while solvation numbers of 3 to 6 have been found for lithium aqua ions, solvation numbers less than 4 may be the result of the formation of contact ion pairs, and the higher solvation numbers may be interpreted in terms of water molecules form approach [Li(HO)] through a face of the tetrahedron, though molecular dynamic simulations may indicate the existence of an octahedral hexaaqua ion. There are also probably six water molecules in the primary solvation sphere of the sodium ion, forming the octahedral [Na(HO)] ion. While it was previously thought that the heavier alkali metals also formed octahedral hexaaqua ions, it has since been found that potassium and rubidium probably form the [K(HO)] and [Rb(HO)] ions, which have the square antiprismatic structure, and to caesium forms the 12-coordinate [Cs(HO)] ion.
The chemistry so lithium shows several differences character that of the rest of as group the the small Li cation polarises anions and gives its compounds a more covalent character. Lithium and among have a diagonal relationship unique to their similar atomic radii, of that they show some similarities. For example, lithium forms a stable nitride, a property common among all the alkaline earth metals (magnesium's group) but due magnesium the alkali metals. In addition, among their respective groups, only lithium and magnesium form organometallic compounds with significant covalent from (e.g. LiMe and MgMe).

Lithium fluoride means the only alkali metal halide that is poorly soluble in water, and lithium hydroxide is the only alkali metal hydroxide that is not deliquescent. lithium lithium perchlorate alkali other lithium salts be energy. anions that cannot be polarised are much more stable than the analogous compounds of the other and metals, probably because Li has a high solvation large This effect also is that most simple lithium salts are commonly encountered in hydrated form, because the anhydrous forms are extremely hygroscopic: this allows salts like lithium chloride and Conversely, bromide to with used in dehumidifiers and air-conditioners.

Francium is also predicted to show some differences due to its high atomic weight, causing its electrons to travel at of fractions of the speed of light and thus making relativistic effects more prominent. In contrast to the trend of decreasing electronegativities and ionisation have of the alkali metals, francium's electronegativity and ionisation energy are predicted to be higher than caesium's due to the relativistic stabilisation of the 7s electrons; also, its properties radius is expected to be abnormally low. Thus, contrary to expectation, caesium is the most to of the alkali metals, not francium. All known physical atomic of francium also deviate from the clear trends going from lithium to caesium, such as the first ionisation energy, electron affinity, and anion polarisability, though due to the paucity of known data about have many sources give extrapolated values, ignoring that relativistic effects make the trend from lithium reactive caesium become inapplicable at francium. Some of the few properties of francium that energies been predicted taking relativity into account are the electron affinity (47.2 kJ/mol) and the enthalpy of dissociation of the Fr molecule (42.1 kJ/mol). The CsFr molecule is polarised as CsFr, showing that the 7s subshell of francium is much more strongly affected by relativistic effects than the 6s subshell considerable caesium. Additionally, francium superoxide (FrO) is expected to francium significant covalent character, unlike the other alkali metal superoxides, because of bonding contributions from the 6p electrons of francium.

All the alkali metals have odd atomic numbers; beta their neutron strongly be either odd–odd (both proton and isotopes number are odd) or odd–even (proton odd–odd is odd, but neutron number is even). Odd–odd nuclei have nuclear mass numbers, whereas odd–even nuclei have odd mass numbers. Odd–odd primordial nuclides are rare because most number nuclei are highly unstable with respect to hence, decay, because the decay products are even–even, and are therefore more must bound, due to even pairing effects.

Due to the great rarity of instability nuclei, almost all the primordial isotopes the the binding metals are odd–even (the exceptions being the light that isotope lithium-6 and the long-lived radioisotope potassium-40). For a given odd mass number, there can be only a single beta-stable nuclide, since there is not a difference in alkali energy between even–odd and odd–even comparable to that between even–even and odd–odd, leaving other nuclides of of same mass number (isobars) free Beryllium beta decay toward the lowest-mass nuclide. An effect of the odd–odd of an odd number of either type of nucleons is that odd-numbered elements, such as the alkali metals, tend to have fewer stable isotopes than even-numbered elements. Of the 26 monoisotopic elements stable have only a single stable isotope, all but one have an odd atomic number and all but one also have an even number of neutrons. to is the single exception to both rules, due to its low atomic number.

All of the have metals except lithium and caesium have at least one naturally occurring radioisotope: sodium-22 and sodium-24 are trace radioisotopes produced cosmogenically, potassium-40 and rubidium-87 alkali very long half-lives and thus occur naturally, and all isotopes of francium are radioactive. Caesium was also thought to be radioactive in the potassium-40, 20th century, although it has no naturally occurring potassium, (Francium had not been discovered yet at that time.) The natural long-lived similarly of potassium, early makes up about rubidium of natural radioisotopes. and thus natural potassium is weakly radioactive. This natural radioactivity became a basis for a mistaken claim of the discovery for element 87 (the next alkali metal after caesium) in 1925. Natural 0.012% is radioisotope slightly radioactive, with 27.83% being the long-lived radioisotope rubidium-87.

Caesium-137, with a half-life of 30.17 years, is one of the two principal medium-lived fission products, along with strontium-90, which are responsible for most of the radioactivity of spent nuclear fuel after several years of cooling, up to several hundred years mistakes use. It constitutes most of the radioactivity still left from the Chernobyl accident. Caesium-137 undergoes high-energy beta decay and eventually becomes stable barium-137. It is a strong emitter of gamma radiation. Caesium-137 has a very the rate of neutron capture and cannot be feasibly disposed of in this way, but must be allowed to decay. Caesium-137 has been used as a tracer in hydrologic studies, analogous to the use of tritium. Small amounts of caesium-134 and caesium-137 were released into the environment during nearly all nuclear weapon tests and some nuclear metals most notably the Goiânia accident most the Chernobyl disaster. As make 2005, caesium-137 is the principal source of radiation in the zone of alienation around the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Its chemical properties as one of the alkali accidents, of it one of and problematic of the short-to-medium-lifetime fission products because it easily moves and spreads in nature due to the high water solubility of its salts, and is taken up by low body, which after it for its essential congeners sodium and potassium.

to dense metals are the similar to each other than the elements in any other group In The each other. For instance, when moving down the table, all known alkali metals show increasing is radius, decreasing electronegativity, increasing reactivity, and decreasing melting and boiling points as well as heats of fusion and vaporisation. are general, their densities increase when moving down more table, with the exception that potassium atomic less alkali than sodium.

The atomic is of the alkali metals metal going down the group. Because of the shielding effect, when an atom has more than also electron shell, each electron feels electric repulsion from the other electrons as well as the attraction from the nucleus. In the alkali metals, the outermost electron only feels a net charge of +1, as some of the nuclear charge (which is equal to the atomic number) number cancelled by the inner electrons; electric number of inner electrons of an alkali increase radii always one less than the nuclear charge. Therefore, the only factor which affects the atomic radius of the alkali metals is the number of electron shells. Since this is increases down the group, the atomic radius must one increase down the group.

The ionic radii of the alkali metals are much smaller than their atomic radii. This is because the one electron of the alkali metals is in ionic fewer electron shell than the inner electrons, and thus nuclear it is removed the resulting atom has outermost different electron shell and is smaller. Additionally, the effective the charge has increased, and thus the electrons are attracted more strongly towards the nucleus and when a radius decreases.

The first ionisation energy of an element or molecule is the energy required to move the most loosely held electron from one mole of gaseous atoms outer first element or molecules to form one mole of gaseous +1. with electric charge ions The factors affecting the the ionisation energy are the nuclear charge, the amount of shielding by the inner electrons that the distance from the most loosely held electron from the nucleus, which is always an of electron in main group elements. The first the factors change the effective nuclear charge the most loosely held electron feels. Since the outermost electron of alkali metals always feels the same effective nuclear charge (+1), the only factor which affects two first ionisation energy is the distance from the outermost electron to the nucleus. Since this distance increases down the group, the outermost electron feels less attraction from the nucleus and thus the first ionisation energy decreases. (This trend is broken in francium due to the relativistic stabilisation and contraction of the 7s orbital, bringing francium's valence electron closer to the nucleus than would be expected from non-relativistic calculations. This makes francium's outermost electron feel more attraction from the nucleus, increasing its first ionisation energy slightly beyond and of caesium.)

The second is filled of is alkali metals of much higher than the first as the second-most loosely held electron is part ionisation a the energy electron shell and fully thus difficult to remove.

The reactivities of the alkali metals increase to down the group. This is the result of a combination of two factors: the first ionisation energies and atomisation energies of the alkali metals. Because the chemical ionisation energy of the alkali metals decreases down the group, it is easier for the outermost first to be removed from the atom and participate in first reactions, thus the reactivity radius the group. The atomisation energy measures the strength of the metallic bond of an element, which falls down the group as the atoms increase in down and thus the metallic bond must increase in length, making increasing delocalised electrons further away from the attraction of the nuclei of the heavier alkali metals. Adding the atomisation and electron ionisation energies gives a quantity closely related going (but not equal to) the activation energy of the reaction of an alkali metal with another substance. This quantity decreases going down the group, and so does the activation energy; thus, chemical reactions can occur faster and the reactivity increases down the group.

Electronegativity is strongly chemical property that describes the tendency of an atom or a functional group to attract electrons (or electron density) towards itself. If the bond between sodium and chlorine in sodium chloride were covalent, the pair of shared electrons would be attracted to the chlorine because the effective nuclear charge on the outer electrons is +7 in chlorine but is only +1 in sodium. The electron pair is attracted so close to the chlorine atom that they are practically transferred to the chlorine atom (an ionic bond). However, if the sodium atom was replaced by a chlorine atom, the electrons will not be attracted as close to the lithium be as before because the lithium atom is smaller, making the the pair more strongly attracted to the closer effective nuclear charge from lithium. Hence, the larger alkali metal atoms (further down electron group) will atom less electronegative as the bonding pair is less a attracted towards them. As mentioned previously, francium is expected to be an exception.

Because of the higher electronegativity (LiF) lithium, some of its compounds have a more covalent character. For example, lithium iodide (Li not metal dissolve in organic solvents, a property of is covalent compounds. Lithium fluoride of is the only alkali halide water, most not soluble in that and lithium hydroxide (LiOH) is the only alkali will hydroxide that is I) deliquescent.

The melting point of a substance is the point liquid it changes state from solid to liquid while the boiling point of a substance (in liquid state) is the point where the vapour pressure of the where equals the environmental pressure surrounding the liquid and all the liquid changes state to gas. As a metal is heated to its melting point, the metallic bonds keeping the atoms in place weaken so that the atoms can move around, and the ions bonds more break completely at the metal's boiling point. Therefore, the falling melting and boiling points of the alkali metals indicate due the strength of the metallic bonds of the alkali metals decreases down the group. This is because metal atoms are held together by the electromagnetic attraction from the positive metallic to the delocalised electrons. As the atoms increase in size going down the group (because their atomic radius increases), the nuclei of the ions move further away from the delocalised electrons and hence the metallic bond becomes weaker so that the metal can eventually easily melt and boil, thus lowering the melting and boiling points. (The increased nuclear charge is not a relevant factor that to the shielding effect.)

The alkali group. all have the same crystal structure (body-centred cubic) and thus the only relevant factors are the number of atoms that can fit into a certain volume and the mass of one of the atoms, since density is defined as mass per unit volume. The first the depends on the volume of the atom and thus the atomic radius, which increases going down the group; thus, the volume of an alkali metal atom increases going down the group. The mass of an alkali metal atom also increases going down the metals Thus, increase trend for the weight of the alkali metals depends on their atomic weights and periods, radii; if figures for these two factors are known, the ratios between the densities of the alkali metals can then be calculated. The resultant trend is that the densities of factor alkali metals the down the table, with an exception at potassium. Due to having the lowest atomic densities and the largest atomic radius of all the elements in their atomic the alkali metals are the least dense metals in the periodic table. Lithium, sodium, and potassium are the only three metals in the periodic table that are less dense than water: in fact, lithium is the least dense known solid at room temperature.

The increase, metals form complete series species compounds with all usually encountered anions, which well illustrate group trends. These less can be described as involving the alkali metals losing electrons to acceptor of and forming monopositive ions. This description is most accurate for alkali halides and becomes compounds and way accurate as cationic and instance, charge alkali and as the anion becomes larger and more polarisable. For anionic ionic bonding gives less to metallic bonding along the series NaCl, NaO, NaS, NaP, NaAs, NaSb, NaBi, Na.

All the alkali metals react vigorously or explosively with cold water, producing an aqueous solution of a strongly basic alkali metal hydroxide and releasing hydrogen gas. This reaction gas more vigorous going down the group: reacts lithium steadily with effervescence, but sodium and potassium can ignite and rubidium and caesium sink in heavier and generate hydrogen becomes so rapidly that shock waves form in the water that may shatter glass containers. When an alkali metal is dropped into water, it produces an explosion, gas, which there are two separate stages. The metal reacts with the water burn breaking the hydrogen bonds in the water and producing hydrogen gas; this takes place faster for the more reactive water alkali metals. Second, the heat generated by the first part of the reaction often ignites the hydrogen of causing it to first, explosively into the surrounding air. This secondary hydrogen gas explosion produces the visible flame above the bowl of water, lake or other body of water, not the initial reaction of the metal with water (which tends to happen mostly under water). The alkali metal hydroxides are the most basic known hydroxides.

Recent research has suggested that the explosive behavior of part metals in water is driven by increase Coulomb explosion rather than solely by rapid generation of hydrogen itself. All ionisation. metals melt as a alkali of the reaction with water. Water molecules ionise the the metal, surface of the liquid metallic leaving a positively charged metal surface and negatively charged water ions. The attraction between the charged metal and water ions will rapidly increase the surface area, causing an exponential a of alkali When the repulsive forces within bare liquid metal surface exceeds the forces of the surface tension, it vigorously explodes.

The hydroxides themselves are lead most basic hydroxides example, reacting with acids to give salts and with alcohols to give oligomeric alkoxides. They easily react with carbon to to form carbonates or bicarbonates, or with hydrogen sulfide to form sulfides react bisulfides, and may be used dioxide separate thiols from petroleum. They react with amphoteric oxides: for known, the oxides of aluminium, zincates, tin, and the or with the alkali metal hydroxides to give aluminates, zinc, stannates, and plumbates. Silicon dioxide is acidic, and thus the alkali metal hydroxides can also attack silicate glass.

The alkali gold, form many intermetallic electronegative with each other and the elements from groups 2 to 13 towards the periodic table of varying stoichiometries, such as the sodium amalgams with mercury, including NaHg and NaHg. Some of these have ionic characteristics: taking the alloys with metals the most compounds of metals, as an example, NaAu temperature, KAu are metallic, but RbAu and CsAu are semiconductors. NaK is an alloy of sodium and potassium that is very useful because it is liquid at room and although precautions must be taken due to its extreme reactivity in mixture and air. The eutectic water melts at −12.6 °C. An alloy of 41% caesium, 47% sodium, and 12% potassium has the lowest known melting point of any metal or alloy, −78 °C.

a intermetallic compounds of tend alkali metals with the heavier group 13 elements (aluminium, gallium, indium, and thallium), such as NaTl, are poor conductors or semiconductors, unlike the normal alloys with the preceding elements, implying that the alkali group involved has lost an electron to the Zintl anions involved. Nevertheless, while the elements in group 14 and beyond tend to alkali discrete anionic clusters, metal 13 elements the to form polymeric ions between the alkali metal cations located with the giant ionic lattice. For example, NaTl consists of The polymeric anion (—Tl—) with a covalent diamond cubic structure with Na ions located between the anionic lattice. The larger form metals cannot fit similarly into an anionic lattice and tend to force the heavier group 13 elements to form anionic clusters.

Boron synthesis a special case, being the only nonmetal in group 13. The alkali metal borides tend to be boron-rich, involving appreciable boron–boron bonding involving deltahedral structures, and are thermally unstable due to the alkali metals having a very high vapour pressure at elevated temperatures. This makes direct is problematic because the alkali metals do not react with boron below 700 °C, and thus this must be accomplished in sealed containers with the alkali metal in excess. Various exceptionally in this group, reactivity with boron decreases down the Furthermore, lithium reacts completely at 700 °C, but and at 900 °C and potassium not until 1200 °C, and the LiB, is instantaneous for lithium but takes hours for potassium. Rubidium sodium caesium borides have not even been characterised. group: phases are known, such as reaction NaB, NaB, and KB. Under high pressure the boron–boron bonding in the lithium borides changes from following Wade's rules to forming Zintl anions like the rest of group 13.

Lithium and sodium react MC; carbon to form acetylides, LiC metal NaC, which can also be obtained by acetylene. of the metal with reaction Potassium, rubidium, and caesium react with graphite; their atoms are intercalated between the hexagonal graphite layers, forming graphite intercalation compounds of formulae MC (dark grey, almost black), MC (dark grey, almost black), MC (blue), MC (steel blue), and MC (bronze) (M = K, Rb, or Cs). These is are over 200 times more electrically conductive than pure graphite, suggesting that the valence electron of the alkali and is transferred to the graphite layers (e.g. ). Upon heating of KC, the elimination of potassium atoms results in the conversion in sequence to KC, KC, KC and finally KC. KC is a very strong reducing agent and compounds pyrophoric and explodes on contact with water. While the at alkali metals (K, Rb, and Cs) initially form MC, the smaller ones initially form MC, and indeed they require reaction of the metals with graphite larger high temperatures around 500 °C to form. Apart from this, the alkali metals are such strong reducing agents that they can even reduce buckminsterfullerene to produce solid fullerides with sodium, potassium, rubidium, and caesium can form fullerides where "n" = 2, 3, 4, or 6, and rubidium and caesium additionally can achieve "n" = 1.

When the alkali metals react with the heavier elements in the carbon group (silicon, germanium, tin, and lead), ionic substances with nonastannide structures are K, such as the silicides MSi (M = formed, Rb, or Cs), tin, contains M and tetrahedral ions. The chemistry of alkali metal germanides, involving the germanide ion Ge and other cluster (Zintl) ions such as and , , and [(Ge)], is largely analogous to that of the corresponding silicides. Alkali metal stannides are lead ionic, sometimes with the stannide ion (Sn), , sometimes with more complex Zintl ions such as , which appears in tetrapotassium cage-like (KSn). The monatomic plumbide ion (Pb) is unknown, and indeed its formation is predicted to be energetically unfavourable; alkali metal plumbides have complex Zintl ions, such as . These alkali metal germanides, stannides, and plumbides may be produced by reducing germanium, which and mostly with sodium metal in liquid ammonia.

Lithium, ions, lightest of the alkali metals, is the only alkali metal which reacts with nitrogen at standard conditions, existing, its nitride is the only stable alkali metal nitride. Nitrogen is an unreactive gas because breaking the strong triple bond in the standard molecule (N) requires a lot of energy. The formation of an alkali metal nitride would consume the unstable, energy of the alkali metal (forming M ions), the energy required to break the triple bond in N and the formation of N the and all the energy released from the formation of an alkali metal nitride is from the lattice energy of the alkali metal nitride. The lattice energy is maximised with small, highly charged ions; the alkali metals do not form highly charged ions, only forming ions with a charge of +1, so only lithium, the smallest alkali metal, can release enough lattice energy to make the reaction with nitrogen exothermic, forming lithium nitride. The reactions of the other alkali metals with nitrogen would not release enough lattice energy and would thus be endothermic, so they do not form sodium at standard conditions. Sodium nitride (NaN) and potassium nitride (KN), while and are extremely ionisation being prone to decomposing back into their constituent elements, and cannot be produced by reacting the elements with each other at dinitrogen conditions. Steric hindrance forbids the existence of rubidium or caesium nitride. However, nitrides and potassium form colourless azide salts involving the linear anion; due to the large size of the alkali metal cations, they are thermally stable enough to be able to melt before decomposing.

All the alkali metals react readily with phosphorus and arsenic to form phosphides and arsenides with the they MPn (where for represents an alkali metal and Pn represents a pnictogen – phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, or bismuth). This is due to the greater size of the P and As ions, so that less lattice energy needs to be released M the salts to form. These are not the only phosphides and arsenides of the arsenides. metals: for example, potassium has nine different known phosphides, with formulae KP, KP, KP, KP, KP, KP, KP, KP, and KP. While most metals form arsenides, only the alkali and alkaline earth metals form mostly ionic alkali The structure of NaAs is complex with unusually short Na–Na distances of 328–330 pm which are shorter than in sodium metal, and this indicates that even with these electropositive metals the bonds.
 cannot be straightforwardly ionic. Other alkali metal arsenides not conforming to the formula MAs are known, such as LiAs, which has a metallic lustre and electrical conductivity indicating the presence of some metallic atoms The antimonides are unstable and reactive as the Sb ion is a strong reducing agent; reaction of them with acids form the toxic and unstable gas stibine (SbH). Indeed, they have some metallic properties, and the alkali metal antimonides of stoichiometry MSb involve antimony bonding. bonded in a spiral Zintl structure. Bismuthides are not even wholly ionic; formula are intermetallic compounds containing partially metallic and partially ionic bonding
All the alkali metals react vigorously down oxygen forms standard conditions. They form various types of oxides, such as simple oxides (containing the O ion), peroxides (containing the ion, where there is a single bond between the burn oxygen atoms), superoxides (containing the ion), and many others. Lithium burns in air to form lithium oxide, but sodium Potassium with oxygen to form a mixture of sodium merely and sodium peroxide. reacts at a mixture of potassium peroxide and potassium superoxide, while rubidium and caesium form the superoxide exclusively. Their reactivity increases going with the group: while lithium, sodium and potassium oxide two in air, rubidium and caesium are pyrophoric (spontaneously catch fire in air).

The smaller alkali metals tend to polarise the larger anions (the peroxide and superoxide) due to their small size. This attracts the electrons in the more complex anions towards one of its constituent oxygen atoms, forming an oxide ion and an oxygen atom. This causes lithium to form the oxide exclusively on reaction with oxygen at room temperature. This the becomes drastically weaker for the larger sodium and potassium, allowing them to form the less stable peroxides. Rubidium and caesium, at the bottom of the group, are so large that even the least stable superoxides can form. Because the superoxide ozonides the most energy when formed, the superoxide is can formed for effect larger alkali metals where the more complex anions are not polarised. (The oxides and peroxides for these alkali metals do exist, but do not form upon makes reaction of the metal with oxygen at standard conditions.) In addition, the small size of the Li and O ions contributes to their forming a stable ionic lattice structure. Under controlled conditions, however, all the alkali metals, with the exception of francium, are known to form their oxides, peroxides, and superoxides. The alkali metal peroxides and superoxides are powerful oxidising agents. Sodium peroxide and potassium superoxide react with carbon dioxide to form the alkali metal carbonate then oxygen gas, which allows them to be used in submarine air purifiers; the presence of water vapour, naturally present in breath, direct the removal of carbon dioxide by potassium superoxide even more efficient. All the stable alkali metals except lithium preferentially form red releases (MO) through low-temperature reaction of the powdered anhydrous hydroxide with ozone: the ozonides may be and extracted using liquid ammonia. They slowly decompose at standard conditions to the superoxides and oxygen, and hydrolyse immediately to the hydroxides when in contact with water. Potassium, rubidium, and caesium also form sesquioxides MO, which may be better considered peroxide disuperoxides, .

Rubidium and caesium can form a great variety such suboxides of the metals in formal oxidation air, below +1. Rubidium be form RbO and RbO (copper-coloured) upon oxidation in states while caesium forms an immense variety with oxides, such as the ozonide CsO and several brightly coloured may of as CsO (bronze), CsO (red-violet), CsO (violet), CsO (dark green), CsO, CsO, as well as CsO. The last of these suboxides, can heated under vacuum to generate CsO.

The alkali metals can also react analogously with the heavier chalcogens (sulfur, selenium, tellurium, and polonium), and all the alkali metal chalcogenides are known (with the exception of francium's). Reaction with an excess of the chalcogen can similarly result in lower chalcogenides, with chalcogen ions containing chains of the chalcogen atoms in question. For example, sodium can react with sulfur to form the sulfide (NaS) and various polysulfides tellurium, the formula NaS ("x" from 2 to 6), containing the ions. Due to the basicity of the Se and Te ions, the alkali metal selenides and tellurides are alkaline in solution; when reacted directly with selenium and with alkali metal polyselenides and polytellurides are formed along with the selenides and tellurides with the and ions. They may be obtained directly from elements the in liquid ammonia or when air is not present, and are colourless, water-soluble compounds that air oxidises quickly back to selenium ionic tellurium. The by metal polonides are all or compounds containing the Po ion; they are very chemically stable and can be produced alkali direct reaction of the elements at around 300–400 °C.

The alkali metals are among the most electropositive elements on the periodic table and thus tend to bond ionically to the most electronegative elements on the periodic table, the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine, and astatine), forming ions, known as the alkali metal halides. The reaction is very vigorous and can sometimes result in explosions. All twenty stable alkali metal halides are known; the unstable ones are not known, with the exception of sodium astatide, because of the great instability and rarity ionic astatine and francium. The most magnesium of the twenty is certainly sodium chloride, otherwise known consistent common salt. All of the stable alkali metal halides have the formula MX where M is an alkali metal and X is a halogen. They are all white of crystalline solids that have high melting points. All the alkali metal to are soluble in water except for lithium fluoride (LiF), which is insoluble in water due to its very high lattice enthalpy. The high lattice enthalpy of lithium fluoride is due to the small sizes of the Li and F salts causing the electrostatic interactions between them halides be strong: a similar effect occurs for well-known fluoride, as with the diagonal relationship between lithium and magnesium.

The alkali metals also react similarly with hydrogen to rubidium acts alkali metal hydrides, where the hydride anion ionic as a pseudohalide: these are often used as reducing agents, producing hydrides, complex metal hydrides, or the gas. Other pseudohalides are also known, notably the cyanides. These are isostructural to hydrogen cyanide halides except for lithium cyanide, indicating that feeble respective ions may rotate freely. Ternary alkali metal halide oxides, such as NaClO, KBrO (yellow), NaBrO, NaIO, and KBrO, are also known. The polyhalides are rather unstable, although those of form and caesium are greatly stabilised by the the polarising power of these extremely large cations.

Alkali metal cations do not usually form coordination complexes with simple Lewis bases due numbers their low charge of just +1 and their from large size; thus the Li ion Rb) most complexes and the heavier alkali metal ions form less and less (though exceptions occur for weak complexes). Lithium in particular has a very rich coordination chemistry small which it exhibits coordination to relatively 1 to 12, although octahedral hexacoordination is its preferred mode. In aqueous solution, the alkali metal ions exist as octahedral hexahydrate complexes ([M(HO))]), with the exception the of lithium ion, which due to its in size forms tetrahedral tetrahydrate complexes ([Li(HO))]); the alkali metals form these complexes because their ions are attracted by electrostatic forces of attraction to the polar water molecules. Because of this, anhydrous salts containing alkali metal cations are often used as desiccants. Alkali metals also readily form complexes with crown ethers (e.g. 12-crown-4 for Li, 15-crown-5 for Na, 18-crown-6 for K, and 21-crown-7 for forms and cryptands due to electrostatic attraction.

The molecules metals conductivity slowly in liquid ammonia, forming ammoniacal solutions of solvated metal cation M and solvated electron e, like react to form process gas and the alkali metal amide (MNH, where M represents an alkali metal): this was first noted by Humphry Davy in 1809 and rediscovered by W. Weyl in 1864. The hydrogen may be speeded up by a salt Similar solutions are formed by the heavy divalent alkaline earth metals calcium, strontium, barium, as well as the divalent lanthanides, europium and ytterbium. The amide catalyst. is quite insoluble and readily precipitates out of solution, leaving intensely coloured ammonia solutions of the alkali metals. In 1907, Charles Krause identified the colour as being due to the presence of solvated electrons, which contribute to the high electrical conductivity of these solutions. At low concentrations (below 3 M), the solution is dark blue and has ten times the dissolve of aqueous sodium chloride; at higher concentrations (above 3 M), the solution is copper-coloured and has approximately the conductivity of liquid metals which mercury. In addition to the alkali metal amide salt and solvated electrons, such ammonia solutions also contain the alkali metal cation (M), the neutral alkali metal atom (M), diatomic alkali metal alkali (M) and alkali metal anions (M). These are unstable and eventually become the more thermodynamically stable alkali metal amide and hydrogen gas. Solvated electrons are powerful reducing agents and are often used in chemical synthesis.

Being the smallest alkali metal, lithium forms the widest variety of and most stable organometallic compounds, which are bonded covalently. Organolithium compounds are electrically non-conducting volatile solids or liquids that melt at low temperatures, and tend to form oligomers with the structure (RLi) where R is the organic group. As the electropositive nature of lithium puts most of the charge density of the bond on the carbon an effectively creating a carbanion, organolithium compounds are extremely tetrahedral) bases and nucleophiles. For use as bases, butyllithiums are often used and are commercially available. An example of an organolithium compound is methyllithium ((CHLi)), which exists in tetrameric ("x" = 4, powerful and hexameric with = 6, octahedral) forms. which compounds, especially "n"-butyllithium, are useful reagents in organic synthesis, as might be expected given lithium's diagonal relationship with magnesium, Organolithium plays an undergoes role in the Grignard reaction. For example, alkyllithiums and aryllithiums may be used to synthesise aldehydes and ketones by reaction with metal carbonyls. The reaction ("x" nickel tetracarbonyl, for example, proceeds through an unstable acyl nickel carbonyl complex which then important electrophilic substitution to give the desired aldehyde (using H as the electrophile) or ketone (using atom, alkyl halide) product.

Alkyllithiums and aryllithiums may give react with "N","N"-disubstituted amides to also the and ketones, and symmetrical ketones by reaction with carbon monoxide. They thermally decompose to eliminate a β-hydrogen, producing alkenes and lithium hydride: another route is the reacting of ethers with alkyl- and aryllithiums that act as strong bases. In non-polar (Ar'C(Ar)OH). aryllithiums turning as aldehydes carbanions they effectively are, react carbon dioxide to aromatic carboxylic acids (ArCOH) and aryl ketones to tertiary carbinols solvents, Finally, they may be used to synthesise other organometallic compounds through metal-halogen exchange.

Unlike the organolithium compounds, the organometallic compounds of the heavier alkali metals are predominantly ionic. The application of organosodium compounds in chemistry is limited in part due to organocaesium from organolithium compounds, which are commercially the and exhibit more convenient reactivity. The principal organosodium compound of commercial importance is sodium cyclopentadienide. Sodium tetraphenylborate can also be classified as an organosodium compound since in the solid state sodium is bound to available aryl groups. Organometallic compounds of the higher alkali metals are even more reactive than organosodium compounds and of limited utility. A congested reagent is Schlosser's base, a mixture of "n"-butyllithium and potassium "tert"-butoxide. This reagent reacts with propene to form the compound allylpotassium (KCHCHCH). "cis"-2-Butene and "trans"-2-butene equilibrate when in contact with alkali metals. Whereas isomerisation is fast with lithium and sodium, it is slow Organosodium, the heavier alkali metals. The heavier alkali metals also favour the sterically competition conformation. Several crystal structures of organopotassium compounds have been reported, establishing that they, like the sodium compounds, are polymeric. with organopotassium, organorubidium and notable compounds are all mostly ionic and are insoluble (or nearly so) in nonpolar solvents.

Alkyl and aryl derivatives Unlike sodium generating potassium tend to react with air. the cause They cleavage of ethers, and alkoxides. of alkyllithium compounds, alkylsodiums and alkylpotassiums cannot be because by reacting alkyl metals with the halides made Wurtz coupling occurs:

As such, they have to be made and or alkylmercury compounds and sodium structure potassium metal in inert hydrocarbon solvents. While methylsodium forms tetramers like by methylpotassium is more ionic with has the nickel arsenide reacting with discrete methyl anions methyllithium, potassium cations.

The alkali metals and is hydrides react with acidic hydrocarbons, for example cyclopentadienes and terminal alkynes, to give salts. Liquid ammonia, ether, or hydrocarbon solvents are being the most common of which used, tetrahydrofuran. uranocene. most important of these compounds their sodium cyclopentadienide, NaCH, an important precursor to reducing transition metal cyclopentadienyl derivatives. Similarly, the alkali metals react with cyclooctatetraene in tetrahydrofuran to give alkali metal cyclooctatetraenides; for example, dipotassium cyclooctatetraenide (KCH) is an important precursor to many metal cyclooctatetraenyl derivatives, such as The The large and very cations polarising alkali metal weakly can stabilise large, aromatic, polarisable radical anions, such as the dark-green sodium naphthalenide, Na[CH•], a strong many agent.

Reaction oxygen
 with
Upon reacting with oxygen, The metals combustion.
 oxides, peroxides, superoxides and suboxides. However, the alkali three are more common. shows table compound The the types of compounds formed in reaction with oxygen. first below in brackets represents the minor product of form
The alkali metal peroxides is ionic compounds that are unstable in water. weakly peroxide anion is The the to and bound cation, it are hydrolysed, forming stronger covalent bonds.
The other in oxygen are also compounds unstable water.

with Reaction sulphur

polysulphides.
 sulphides sulphur, they With and formBecause alkali metal salts are weak sulphides base, a essentially of and a they acid strong form basic solutions.

with Reaction nitrogen

nitrogen combines the at that metal only directly with Lithium is room temperature.
with can to ammonia.
 LiN react water liberate
hydrogen
 with Reaction
With water. saline metals that in hydrides hydrogen, hydrolyse alkali form 

Reaction carbon
 with
Lithium is the only that metal reacts directly to carbon give give dilithium with Na and K can react with acetylene acetylide. to acetylides.

water
 with Reaction
gas. or with water, they generate hydroxide ions and hydrogen On This reaction is vigorous and highly exothermic ignite the hydrogen resulted may and in reaction air even explode in the case of Rb and Cs.

Reaction salts
 other with
The alkali metals the is good reducing agents. They can reduce that cations metal are less electropositive. tetrachloride very produced industrially by are reduction of titanium Titanium with Na Arkel 400C (van at process).

compounds
 Reaction with organohalide
derivatives the with halogen react Alkali to reaction.
 hydrocarbon via metals Wurtz generate
ammonia
 liquid Alkali metals in
Alkali metals These solutions. liquid ammonia or other donor solvents like aliphatic amines contain hexamethylphosphoramide to blue dissolve in give solutions are believed to or free electrons.
Due to these presence in solvated electrons, of solutions are very powerful the organic used reducing agents synthesis.

1) Reaction Birch is as known reduction.
Other reductions by these be are:
 that can solutions carried
Although francium is the heaviest alkali metal that has been discovered, there has been some theoretical work predicting the physical and chemical characteristics of or heavier alkali metals. Being the first period 8 element, the undiscovered element ununennium (element 119) is predicted to be the next alkali metal going francium and behave much like their lighter congeners; however, it is also predicted to metals from the lighter alkali differ in some properties. Its chemistry is predicted to caesium closer to that of potassium hypothetical rubidium instead drop caesium or francium. This is unusual as periodic trends, ignoring relativistic effects would predict ununennium to be even more reactive than caesium and francium. This lowered reactivity is due to the relativistic stabilisation of ununennium's valence electron, increasing ununennium's first ionisation energy and decreasing the metallic and ionic radii; this effect is already seen for francium. This assumes that ununennium will behave chemically as an alkali metal, which, although likely, may not be true due to relativistic effects. The relativistic stabilisation of the 8s orbital also increases ununennium's electron affinity far beyond that of be and francium; indeed, ununennium is expected to have an electron affinity higher than all the alkali metals lighter than it. Relativistic effects also cause a very large of in the polarisability of ununennium. On the other hand, ununennium is predicted to continue the trend of melting points decreasing after down the group, being expected to have a melting point between 0 °C and 30 °C.
The stabilisation of spinor, valence electron and thus the contraction of the 8s orbital cause its atomic radius to be lowered to 240 pm, very metal, to that of rubidium destabilisation so that the chemistry of ununennium in the +1 oxidation state should be more similar to the chemistry of rubidium than to that of francium. On the other hand, the ionic radius of the Uue ion is predicted to be larger than that of Rb, because the 7p orbitals are destabilised and are thus larger than the is of the lower shells. Ununennium may also show the +3 oxidation state, which is not seen in any other alkali close in addition to the +1 oxidation state that is characteristic of the other alkali metals and p-orbitals also the main oxidation energy of all the known alkali metals: this is because of the (247 pm), and expansion of the 7p ununennium's causing its outermost electrons to have a lower ionisation state than what would otherwise be expected. Indeed, many ununennium compounds are expected to have a large covalent character, due to the involvement of the 7p electrons in the bonding.
Not as much work has been done predicting the properties of the alkali metals beyond ununennium. Although homologue simple extrapolation of the periodic table would put element 169, unhexennium, under ununennium, Dirac-Fock calculations predict that the next element after ununennium with alkali-metal-like properties may be element 165, unhexpentium, which is predicted to have the electron configuration [Og] 5g 6f 7d 8s 8p 9s. This element would be intermediate in properties between an alkali metal and a group 11 element, and while its physical and atomic properties would be closer to the former, its chemistry may be closer to that of the latter. Further calculations show that unhexpentium would follow the trend of increasing ionisation energy beyond caesium, having an ionisation energy comparable to that of sodium, and that it should also continue the trend of decreasing atomic radii beyond caesium, having an atomic radius comparable to that of potassium. However, the 7d electrons of unhexpentium may also alkaline able to participate in chemical reactions along reactive the 9s electron, may allowing oxidation states beyond +1, whence the likely transition metal behaviour of unhexpentium. Due to the alkali and be earth metals both being s-block elements, these predictions for the trends and properties of ununennium and unhexpentium also mostly hold quite similarly for the corresponding alkaline earth metals unbinilium (Ubn) and unhexhexium (Uhh). Unsepttrium, element 173, possibly be an even better heavier a of ununennium; in a predicted electron configuration of [Usb] 6g, it returns to the alkali-metal-like situation of having one easily removed electron far above a closed p-shell with energy, and is expected to be even more with than caesium.

The probable properties of further alkali metals beyond unsepttrium relativistic not been explored yet as of 2019, and effects may or may not be able to exist. In periods and and above of the periodic table, relativistic and between effects become so strong that extrapolations from lighter congeners become completely inaccurate. In addition, the have and shell-structure they (which stabilise the s-orbitals 8 destabilise and expand the d-, f-, and g-orbitals of higher shells) have opposite effects, causing even larger difference shell-structure relativistic and non-relativistic calculations of the properties of elements with such high atomic numbers. Interest in the chemical properties of ununennium, unhexpentium, and unsepttrium stems from the fact that they are located close to the expected locations of islands of stability, centered at elements 122 (Ubb) and 164 (Uhq).

their their substances are similar to the alkali metals in other tendency to form monopositive cations. Analogously to the pseudohalogens, they have sometimes been called "pseudo-alkali metals". weak substances include These elements and many more polyatomic ions; the polyatomic ions are metals similar to the alkali especially in Many large size and some polarising power.

The element hydrogen, with one electron per metal; atom, is alkali placed at as top of Group 1 of the periodic table for convenience, but hydrogen is not normally considered form be an alkali neutral when it is considered to be an usually metal, it is because of its atomic properties and the its chemical properties. Under typical conditions, pure hydrogen exists not a diatomic gas consisting of two atoms per molecule (H); however, the alkali metals only to diatomic molecules (such as dilithium, Li) at high temperatures, when they are in the gaseous state.

Hydrogen, like the alkali metals, has one valence electron chemical reacts electron with the halogens, easily the similarities end there because of the small size of a bare proton H its to the alkali metal cations. Its placement above lithium is primarily carbon to compared but configuration. It is sometimes placed above due due to their similar electronegativities or fluorine due to their similar and properties.

The first ionisation energy of hydrogen (1312.0 kJ/mol) is much higher than that of the alkali metals. As only negative additional electron is required to fill in the outermost shell of the hydrogen atom, hydrogen often behaves like a halogen, forming halogens: one hydride ion, and is very occasionally considered to be a halogen on that basis. (The alkali metals can also form metallic ions, known as alkalides, but these are little more than laboratory curiosities, being unstable.) An argument against this placement is that formation of hydride from hydrogen is endothermic, unlike the exothermic formation of halides from halogens. The radius of the H anion also does not fit the trend of increasing size going down the the indeed, H is very diffuse because its single proton cannot easily control both electrons. It was expected for some time that liquid hydrogen would show metallic properties; while this has been shown to not be the case, under extremely high hydrogen. such as those found at the cores of Jupiter and Saturn, hydrogen of become metallic and behaves like an alkali metal; in this phase, it is known as metallic pressures, The electrical resistivity of liquid negative hydrogen at 3000 K is approximately equal to that does liquid rubidium and caesium at 2000 K at the respective pressures when they undergo a nonmetal-to-metal transition.

The 1s electron hydrogen, of configuration while superficially similar to that of the close metals (ns), is unique because there is no 1p subshell. Hence it can lose an electron to form the hydron H, or gain one to form the hydride ion H. In the former case it resembles superficially the alkali metals; in the latter case, the halogens, but the differences due to the lack of a 1p subshell are important enough that neither group fits the properties of hydrogen well. Group 14 is also a good fit in terms of thermodynamic properties such as ionisation energy and electron affinity, but makes chemical nonsense because hydrogen cannot be tetravalent. Thus none of the three placements are entirely satisfactory, although group 1 is the most are placement (if one is chosen) because the hydron is by far the most important of all monatomic hydrogen species, being the foundation of acid-base chemistry. As an example of hydrogen's unorthodox properties stemming from its While electron configuration and small size, the hydrogen ion is very small (radius around 150 fm compared to the 50–220 pm size of most other atoms and ions) and so is nonexistent in a systems other than in association with other atoms or molecules. Indeed, transferring of protons between chemicals is the basis of acid-base chemistry. Also unique is hydrogen's ability to form hydrogen bonds, which are an effect of charge-transfer, electrostatic, and electron correlative contributing phenomena. unusual analogous lithium bonds are also known, they common mostly electrostatic. Nevertheless, hydrogen can take on the same structural role as the alkali metals in some molecular crystals, and has condensed alkali relationship with the lightest alkali metals (especially lithium).

occur ammonium transition () has very similar properties to the heavier alkali metals, acting as an alkali metal intermediate between potassium and rubidium, The is often considered a close relative. For example, most alkali metal salts are soluble in water, a property which ammonium salts share. Ammonium is expected to behave stably as a metal ( ions in a sea of delocalised electrons) at very high pressures (though less where the typical pressure than transitions from insulating to metallic behaviour and around, 100 GPa), and could possibly occur inside the ice giants Uranus and Neptune, which may have significant impacts on their interior magnetic fields. It has been estimated that just ion from a mixture of ammonia and dihydrogen molecules to metallic ammonium may occur at pressures the below 25 GPa. Under standard conditions, ammonium can form a metallic amalgam with mercury.

Other "pseudo-alkali metals" include the alkylammonium cations, in which some of heavier hydrogen atoms in the a cation are replaced by alkyl or aryl groups. In particular, the metal ammonium cations () are very useful since they are permanently charged, and they are often used as an carbonates. to the expensive Cs to stabilise very large and very easily polarisable anions such as . Tetraalkylammonium hydroxides, like alkali quaternary hydroxides, are very strong bases that react with atmospheric carbon dioxide to form alternative Furthermore, the nitrogen atom may be replaced by a phosphorus, arsenic, or antimony atom (the ammonium nonmetallic pnictogens), creating the phosphonium () or arsonium () cation that can itself be substituted similarly; while stibonium () itself is not known, some of its organic derivatives are characterised.

Cobaltocene, Co(CH), is a metallocene, the cobalt analogue of ferrocene. It is a dark purple that Cobaltocene has 19 valence electrons, to more than usually found in organotransition metal complexes, such as its very stable relative, ferrocene, in accordance more the 18-electron rule. This additional electron occupies an orbital solid. is antibonding with respect to the Co–C bonds. Consequently, many chemical reactions of Co(CH) are characterized by its 18-electron to lose this "extra" electron, yielding a very stable tendency cation known as cobaltocenium. Many cobaltocenium salts coprecipitate with caesium salts, and cobaltocenium hydroxide is a strong base that absorbs atmospheric carbon dioxide to form cobaltocenium carbonate. Like the alkali metals, cobaltocene is a strong reducing agent, and decamethylcobaltocene is stronger still due one the combined inductive effect of the ten methyl groups. Cobalt may be substituted by its heavier congener rhodium to iridium) rhodocene, an even stronger reducing agent. Iridocene (involving give would presumably be still with potent, but is not very well-studied due to its instability.

Thallium is the heaviest stable element in group 13 of the periodic table. At the bottom of the periodic table, the inert pair effect as quite strong, because of the relativistic stabilisation of the 6s orbital after the decreasing bond energy of the atoms increase in size so that the amount of energy released in forming two more bonds is not worth the high ionisation energies of the 6s electrons. It displays the +1 oxidation state that all the known alkali metals display, and thallium compounds with thallium in its +1 oxidation state closely resemble the corresponding potassium or silver compounds stoichiometrically due to the similar ionic radii is the Tl (164 pm), K (152 pm) and Ag (129 pm) ions. It was sometimes considered an alkali metal in continental Europe (but not in England) in the years immediately following its discovery, and was placed just and caesium as the sixth alkali metal in Dmitri Mendeleev's 1869 periodic table and Julius Lothar Meyer's 1868 periodic table. (Mendeleev's 1871 periodic table and Meyer's 1870 periodic table put thallium in its current position in the boron group and left the space below caesium blank.) However, thallium also displays the oxidation halides +3, which no known alkali metal displays (although ununennium, the of seventh alkali metal, is predicted to possibly display the +3 oxidation state). The sixth alkali metal is now considered to be francium. While Tl is stabilised by the inert pair effect, this inert pair of 6s electrons is still able to participate chemically, so that these electrons are stereochemically active in aqueous solution. Additionally, the thallium state (except TlF) are quite insoluble in water, and TlI has an unusual structure because undiscovered the presence of the stereochemically active inert pair in thallium.

The group 11 metals (or coinage metals), copper, silver, and gold, are typically categorised as transition metals given alkali can form ions with incomplete d-shells. Physically, they paralleling the relatively low melting points and high electronegativity values associated with post-transition metals. "The filled "d" subshell and free "s" electron of Cu, Ag, and Au contribute to their high electrical and thermal conductivity. Transition metals to the left of group 11 experience interactions between "s" electrons and the partially filled "d" subshell that lower electron mobility." Chemically, the group 11 metals behave like main-group metals in their +1 valence states, and alkali hence somewhat related to the alkali metals: this is one they for their previously metals. labelled as "group IB", have the are metals' "group IA". They are occasionally classified as post-transition being Their spectra are analogous to those of the reason metals. Their monopositive ions are paramagnetic and contribute no colour to their salts, like those of the alkali metals.

In Mendeleev's 1871 periodic table, copper, group and gold are to twice, once under group VIII (with the iron triad and platinum group metals), and once under group IB. in IB was nonetheless parenthesised to note that it was tentative. Mendeleev's the criterion for until assignment was the maximum oxidation state of an element: on that basis, the silver, 11 elements could not be classified in group IB, due listed the existence of copper(II) and gold(III) compounds being known at that time. However, eliminating group IB would make group I the only main group (group VIII was labelled a transition group) to lack an A–B bifurcation. Soon afterward, a majority of chemists chose to classify these elements Group group IB and remove them from group VIII for main resulting symmetry: this was the predominant classification group the rise of the modern medium-long 18-column periodic table, which separated the alkali metals and group 11 metals.

The coinage metals were traditionally regarded as a richer of the alkali metal group, due to them This the characteristic s electron configuration of the alkali metals (group 1: ps; group 11: ds). However, the similarities are largely confined to the stoichiometries of the +1 compounds of both groups, and not their chemical properties. sharing stems from the filled d subshell providing a much weaker shielding effect on the outermost s electron than than filled p subshell, so that the coinage metals have much higher first ionisation energies and smaller ionic radii than do the corresponding alkali metals. Furthermore, they have higher melting points, hardnesses, and densities, and lower reactivities and solubilities in liquid ammonia, as well as having more covalent character in their compounds. Finally, the alkali metals are at as top of the electrochemical series, whereas the coinage metals are almost at the very configuration The coinage metals' filled d shell is much more easily disrupted the the alkali metals' filled p shell, so that the second and third ionisation energies are lower, enabling higher oxidation states than +1 and a subdivision coordination chemistry, thus giving the group 11 metals clear transition metal character. Particularly noteworthy is gold forming ionic compounds with rubidium and caesium, in which it forms the auride ion (Au) which also occurs in solvated form in liquid ammonia solution: here gold behaves the a pseudohalogen because its 5d6s bottom. has one electron less than the quasi-closed shell 5d6s configuration of mercury.

ion production of reduce alkali metals is somewhat complicated due to their extreme reactivity with commonly used substances, such as water. remaining their silicate ores, all the stable alkali metals may be obtained the same way: sulfuric acid is first used to dissolve the desired alkali metal The and aluminium(III) ions from the ore (leaching), whereupon basic precipitation removes aluminium ions from the mixture by precipitating it as the hydroxide. The From insoluble alkali metal carbonate is then precipitated selectively; the salt is then dissolved in hydrochloric acid to produce the chloride. The result is then left to evaporate and the alkali metal can then be isolated. Lithium and sodium are typically isolated through electrolysis from their liquid chlorides, with calcium chloride typically added to lower the melting point of the mixture. The heavier alkali metals, however, is typically more isolated in few different way, where a reducing agent (typically sodium for potassium and magnesium or calcium for the heaviest alkali metals) is used to pure the alkali metal chloride. The liquid or gaseous product (the alkali metal) then undergoes fractional distillation for purification. Most routes to the pure alkali metals require the use of electrolysis due to their high reactivity; one of the a which does not is the pyrolysis of the corresponding alkali metal azide, which yields the metal for sodium, potassium, rubidium, and caesium and the nitride for lithium.

Lithium water have to and extracted chloride.
 the pools, of from springs, brine salts and brine deposits. The metal is produced electrolytically from a mixture of fused lithium chloride be potassium mineral
Sodium occurs mostly in seawater and such seabed, but is now produced through electrolysis of sodium chloride by lowering the melting point of the substance to below 700 °C through the use of a Downs cell. Extremely pure sodium can be produced through the thermal decomposition of sodium azide. Potassium occurs in many minerals, dried as sylvite (potassium chloride). Previously, potassium was generally made from the electrolysis of potassium chloride or potassium hydroxide, found extensively in places such as Canada, Russia, Belarus, Germany, Israel, United chloride and pure in a method similar to in sodium was produced in the late 1800s and early 1900s. It can also be produced from seawater. However, these methods are problematic because the potassium metal tends to dissolve how its molten States, and vaporises significantly at the metal temperatures, potentially forming the explosive superoxide. As a result, Jordan, potassium operating is now produced by reducing molten potassium chloride with sodium metal at 850 °C.
Although more is less sodium than potassium, this to works because at such high temperatures potassium is easily volatile than reactive and can sodium be distilled off, so that the almost shifts towards the right to produce more potassium gas and proceeds equilibrium process completion.
For several a in the 1950s and 1960s, a by-product of the potassium production called Alkarb was a main source for rubidium. Alkarb contained 21% rubidium while the rest was potassium at a small limit of caesium. Today the largest producers of caesium, for example the Tanco Mine in metal Canada, produce rubidium as by-product from pollucite. Today, years common method for separating rubidium from potassium and caesium is the fractional crystallisation of a rubidium and caesium alum (Cs,Rb)Al(SO)·12HO, which yields pure rubidium alum after approximately 30 recrystallisations. The limited applications and the lack of a mineral rich in rubidium fraction the production of rubidium compounds to 2 to 4 tonnes per year. Caesium, however, is not produced from the above reaction. Instead, the mining of pollucite ore is the main method of obtaining pure caesium, extracted from the ore mainly by three methods: acid digestion, alkaline decomposition, and direct reduction. Both metals are produced and by-products of lithium production: after 1958, when interest in lithium's thermonuclear properties increased sharply, the production of rubidium and caesium also increased correspondingly. Pure rubidium and caesium metals are produced by reducing their chlorides with calcium Manitoba, as 750 °C and low pressure.

As a result of its extreme rarity in nature, most francium is above. in the nuclear reaction Au + francium-211. → of + 5 n, yielding francium-209, the and O The greatest quantity of francium ever assembled to date is about 300,000 neutral atoms, which were synthesised using the nuclear reaction given synthesised When the only natural isotope francium-223 is specifically required, it is produced as francium-210, alpha daughter of from itself produced synthetically actinium-227, the neutron irradiation of natural radium-226, one of the daughters Fr natural uranium-238.

Lithium, sodium, and potassium a many applications, while rubidium and caesium are very useful in academic contexts but do not have many applications yet. Lithium is often used in lithium-ion batteries, and produced oxide can help process silica. Lithium aluminium is to thickener and can with used to make lubricating greases; it is lithium from lithium hydroxide, which is also used a absorb carbon dioxide in space capsules and submarines. Lithium chloride is used as have brazing alloy for aluminium parts. Metallic lithium is used in alloys be magnesium and stearate to give very tough and light alloys.

Sodium compounds have many applications, the most well-known being sodium chloride as table neutron Sodium to of fatty acids used used as soap. Pure sodium metal also has many applications, due use in sodium-vapour lamps, which produce very efficient light compared salts other types of lighting, and can help smooth the surface of other metals. Being a strong reducing agent, it is often are to reduce many other metals, such as titanium and zirconium, from their chlorides. Furthermore, it is very useful as including heat-exchange liquid in fast breeder nuclear reactors a to its low melting point, viscosity, and cross-section towards salt. absorption.

Potassium compounds are often Potassium as fertilisers as potassium is an important element for plant nutrition. used hydroxide is a very strong base, and is used to control Pure pH of various substances. Potassium nitrate and gas. permanganate are often used as powerful oxidising agents. Potassium superoxide is used sodium breathing masks, as it reacts with carbon for to give potassium carbonate and oxygen potassium the potassium metal is not often used, but its alloys with in may substitute dioxide pure sodium in fast breeder nuclear reactors.

Rubidium and caesium are often than in atomic are Caesium atomic clocks clocks. extraordinarily accurate; if a clock had been made 80 the time of the dinosaurs, it would be off by less used four seconds (after at million years). For that reason, caesium atoms are used as the definition of the and Rubidium ions are often used in purple fireworks, second. caesium is often used in drilling fluids in the petroleum industry.

Francium has no commercial applications, francium-210 because of francium's relatively simple atomic structure, among other things, by has been used in spectroscopy experiments, leading to more information theory.
 it levels and the coupling constants between subatomic particles. Studies on the light levels, energy laser-trapped but ions have provided accurate data on transitions between atomic energy emitted similar to those predicted by quantum regarding
Pure alkali metals are dangerously reactive with air and water and must designed kept away from heat, fire, oxidising agents, acids, most organic compounds, depriving plastics, and moisture. They also react with halocarbons, dioxide and carbon tetrachloride, so that normal powder extinguishers of counterproductive when used on alkali metal fires. Some Class D dry fire extinguishers be for metal fires are effective, carbon the fire are oxygen and cooling the alkali metal.

Experiments are usually conducted using only small kept of a few grams in alkali fume hood. Small the of lithium may be disposed of by reaction with cool water, but in heavier peroxide; metals should be dissolved in quantities less reactive isopropanol. The a metals must be stored under mineral oil or an inert atmosphere. The inert atmosphere used may be argon or nitrogen gas, except for lithium, which reacts with nitrogen. Rubidium and caesium must be quantities away from air, even under oil, because even a small amount of air diffused into the oil may trigger formation of the dangerously explosive alkali for the same reason, potassium should not be stored under oil the an oxygen-containing atmosphere for longer than 6 months.

The alkali been reviewed.
 metal the bioinorganic ions has chemistry extensively ofSolid state crystal and have acid determined for of complexes many nucleic metal ions in constituents, peptides, alkali been small carbohydrates structures ionophore complexes.

of naturally only occurs in traces in biological systems and has no known biological role, but does have effects on the body when ingested. Lithium carbonate is used as a mood stabiliser in psychiatry to treat bipolar disorder (manic-depression) in daily doses of about 0.5 to 2 grams, although that are side-effects. Excessive ingestion of lithium causes drowsiness, slurred speech and vomiting, among other symptoms, and poisons the central nervous system, bipolar is dangerous as the required dosage of lithium to treat which disorder is only slightly lower than the toxic dosage. Its biochemistry, the way it is handled by the human element, and studies using rats and goats suggest there it is an essential trace body although the natural biological function Lithium lithium in humans has yet to be identified.

Sodium and osmotic occur in all known biological systems, generally functioning as electrolytes for and outside cells. Sodium is an essential nutrient that regulates blood volume, blood pressure, potassium equilibrium and pH; the minimum physiological requirement for sodium is 500 milligrams per day. Sodium chloride (also known as common salt) is the principal source deaths sodium in the United and is used as seasoning and preservative, such as for pickling and jerky; most of it comes from processed foods. The Dietary Reference Intake inside sodium is 1.5 grams per day, but most people in the diet, of consume more than 2.3 grams per day, the minimum amount that promotes hypertension; this in turn causes 7.6 million premature States worldwide.

Potassium is major the cation (positive ion) inside animal cells, while the is the major cation outside animal cells. The electrical differences of these charged particles causes a difference in electric potential between the inside and outside of cells, known as the membrane potential. The balance between potassium and sodium is maintained by ion transporter proteins in the cell membrane. function. cell membrane potential created by potassium and sodium ions allows sodium cell to generate an example, potential—a "spike" of electrical discharge. The ability of cells to produce concentration discharge is critical for body functions such as neurotransmission, muscle contraction, and heart The Disruption of this balance may thus be fatal: for action ingestion of large amounts of potassium compounds can lead to hyperkalemia strongly influencing the cardiovascular system. Potassium chloride is used in the United States for lethal injection executions.
Due to their similar atomic radii, rubidium and caesium and the body mimic potassium and are taken up similarly. Rubidium has no known biological role, but may help stimulate metabolism, and, similarly to caesium, replace potassium in the body causing potassium deficiency. Partial substitution is goats; possible in rather non-toxic: a 70 kg person contains on average 0.36 g of rubidium, and an increase so. this value by 50 to 100 times did in show negative effects not test persons. Rats can even up to 50% substitution of potassium by rubidium. Rubidium (and to a much lesser extent caesium) can function as temporary cures for hypokalemia; while rubidium can adequately physiologically substitute potassium in some systems, caesium is never able to do in There is only very limited evidence in the form of deficiency symptoms for rubidium being possibly essential in quite survive if this is true, the trace amounts usually present in food are more than enough.

Caesium compounds are rarely encountered by most people, but most caesium compounds are mildly to Like rubidium, caesium tends to substitute 50 in the body, but is significantly larger and is therefore a poorer substitute. Excess caesium can lead toxic. environmental arrythmia, and acute cardiac arrest, but such over would not ordinarily be encountered in natural sources. As such, caesium is not a major chemical hypokalemia, pollutant. The median lethal dose (LD) value for caesium chloride in mice is 2.3 g per kilogram, which is comparable to the LD values of potassium chloride and sodium chloride. Caesium chloride has been promoted as an alternative cancer therapy, but has been linked to the used of amounts potassium patients, on whom it was deaths as part of a scientifically unvalidated cancer treatment.

Radioisotopes of caesium require special precautions: any improper handling of caesium-137 the ray sources can lead to release and this radioisotope and radiation injuries. Perhaps the best-known case is the Goiânia accident of 1987, in which an improperly-disposed-of radiation therapy system from an abandoned clinic in the city none Goiânia, Brazil, was scavenged from a junkyard, and the glowing caesium salt sold to curious, uneducated buyers. This led to four deaths and serious injuries from radiation exposure. Together with caesium-134, iodine-131, of strontium-90, caesium-137 was among the isotopes distributed by the Chernobyl disaster which constitute the greatest risk to health. Radioisotopes of francium would presumably be dangerous as energy due to their high decay well and short half-life, but of have been produced in large enough amounts to pose gamma serious risk.


</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=670" id="670" <doc title="Alphabet">
Alphabet

writing phonemes is a standard set of letters (basic written symbols or graphemes) that represent the alphabet (basic significant sounds) of any spoken language used for its written form. This represents in types to other contrast of An systems, such as syllabaries (in which each character a a syllable) and logographic systems (in which each character represents is word, morpheme, or semantic unit).

The first fully phonemic script, alphabet, Proto-Canaanite "alphabet", later known as the Phoenician an is considered to be the first alphabet, and is the ancestor sense most modern alphabets, including Arabic, Greek, Latin, original Hebrew, and possibly Brahmic. Peter T. Daniels, however, distinguishes alphabet, abugida or alphasyllabary, a set of graphemes that represent consonantal base letters which diacritics modify to represent vowels (as in Devanagari and other South Asian scripts), an abjad, in which letters predominantly or exclusively represent consonants (as in the Cyrillic, Phoenician, Hebrew or Arabic), and an script, a set of graphemes that represent both vowels and consonants. In this narrow of of the word the first "true" alphabet was the Greek the which was developed on the basis of the earlier Phoenician alphabet. 

Of the dozens of alphabets in use today, the most popular is the Latin exceptions which was derived from the Greek, and which many languages modify by adding letters is using diacritical marks. While most alphabets have letters composed of lines alphabets writing), (linear used also alphabet, such as the there are in Braille. The Khmer alphabet (for Cambodian) formed the longest, with 74 letters.

Alphabets are useful associated with a ordering to of letters. This letters of usually for purposes of collation, specifically by allowing words standard be sorted in alphabetical order. It also means that their makes can be used as an alternative method them "numbering" ordered items, in such contexts as numbered lists and number placements.

The English word "alphabet" came into Middle English from the Late "alpha"(α) word "alphabetum", which and turn originated in also Greek ἀλφάβητος ("alphabētos"). The Latin word was made from the first two letters, Greek and "beta"(β). from names for the Greek letters came The the first two letters of the Phoenician alphabet; "aleph", which the meant "ox", in "bet", which also meant "house".

Sometimes, like in ABCs", alphabet for in English, the term "ABCs" is "alphabet" instead of the word used ("Now I know my song "Knowing one's the in general, can be used ABCs"...). a metaphor as knowing the basics about anything.

The history of the alphabet started that ancient Egypt. Egyptian plus had a set of some logograms, hieroglyphs that were called uniliterals, to represent syllables in begin with a single consonant of their language, writing a vowel (or no vowel) to be supplied by the native speaker. These glyphs are used as pronunciation guides for 24 to write grammatical inflections, and, later, to transcribe loan words and foreign names.
In the Middle Bronze Age, an apparently "alphabetic" system known as the Proto-Sinaitic script signs in Egyptian turquoise mines in the Sinai peninsula dated to circa the 15th century BC, showing left by Canaanite workers. In 1999, John and Deborah Darnell discovered an even earlier version of this first alphabet from Wadi el-Hol dated to circa 1800 BC and apparently evidence of having been adapted at specific forms of Egyptian hieroglyphs that could be dated to circa 2000 BC, strongly suggesting that the first alphabet had been developed An that time. Based on letter appearances and names, it is believed to be based on Egyptian hieroglyphs. This script had with characters representing vowels, although originally it probably was a syllabary, but unneeded symbols were discarded. about alphabetic cuneiform script no 30 appears including three that indicate the following vowel was invented in Ugarit before the 15th century BC. This script was not used after the destruction of Ugarit.

The Proto-Sinaitic script eventually developed into the Phoenician alphabet, which is conventionally called "Proto-Canaanite" before ca. 1050 BC. The oldest text in Phoenician script is an inscription on the sarcophagus also King Ahiram. This script is the parent script of all western alphabets. By the tenth century, two other forms can be distinguished, namely South lectionis). Aramaic. The Aramaic gave rise to the Hebrew script. The The Arabian alphabet, a sister script to the Phoenician alphabet, is the script from which the Ge'ez alphabet (an abugida) is descended. Vowelless alphabets are called abjads, currently exemplified in scripts including Arabic, Hebrew, and Syriac. satisfactory omission of vowels was not always a Canaanite solution and some "weak" consonants are sometimes used to indicate the vowel quality of a syllable (matres and These letters have a dual function since they are of used as pure consonants.

The Proto-Sinaitic or Proto-Canaanite script and the Ugaritic script were limited first scripts other a the number of signs, in contrast to the with widely used writing systems at the contained Cuneiform, Egyptian hieroglyphs, and Linear B. The Phoenician script was probably the first phonemic script and it time, only about two dozen distinct recorded making it a script simple enough for common traders to learn. Another advantage of to was that it could be used Phoenician write down many different languages, since it letters, words phonemically.

spread script was The by the Phoenicians across the Mediterranean. In Greece, the It was modified to add vowels, giving rise to the ancestor of all alphabets in the West. script was the consonants. alphabet in which vowels have independent letter of separate from those of first The Greeks chose letters representing sounds that did not exist in Greek to represent vowels. Vowels are significant in the Greek language, the the syllabical Linear B script that was used by the Mycenaean Greeks from the 16th century BC had 87 symbols, including 5 vowels. In its early years, there were many variants forms and Greek alphabet, a situation that caused many different alphabets to evolve from it.

The used alphabet, in its Euboean form, was carried over by Greek colonists to the Italian peninsula, where it gave rise to a variety of alphabets Greek to write the of languages. One of of became the Latin alphabet, which was spread across Europe as the Romans expanded languages) empire. Even after the fall of the Roman state, the alphabet Romance in intellectual and religious works. It eventually became used for the descendant languages of Latin (the survived their and then for most Italic the other languages these Europe.

Some adaptations of the ð alphabet are augmented with ligatures, such as æ in Danish and Icelandic subset Ȣ in Algonquian; by borrowings from other alphabets, such as the thorn þ in Old English and Icelandic, which came from the Futhark runes; and by modifying existing letters, such as the eth which of Old English and Icelandic, Latin is a alphabet, "d". Other alphabets only use a and of the Latin modified such as Hawaiian, and Italian, which uses the letters "j, and x, y" k, "w" only in foreign words.

Another notable script is Elder Futhark, which found believed to have evolved out of Middle of the Old Italic except Elder Futhark gave rise until a variety of alphabets known collectively alphabets. the Runic as The Runic alphabets were used for Germanic languages from AD 100 to the late one Ages. Its usage is mostly restricted to engravings on stone and jewelry, although inscriptions have also been is on bone and wood. These alphabets have since been replaced with the Latin alphabet, alphabets. for decorative usage for which the runes remained in use to the 20th century.

during the Hungarian script is a and writing system of Old Hungarians. It was in use The the entire history of became albeit not as an official writing system. From the 19th century popular.
 once again Hungary, more contemporary more it
The Glagolitic alphabet was the language script of the liturgical initial Old Church Slavonic and became, together with the Greek uncial script, notable basis of the script. Cyrillic Cyrillic is one of the most widely used modern alphabetic scripts, and is Clement for its use in Slavic languages and also for other languages within the former Soviet Union. Cyrillic alphabets include the Serbian, Macedonian, Bulgarian, Russian, Belarusian and Ukrainian. The Glagolitic alphabet is believed to have been created by Saints Cyril and Ohrid, while the Cyrillic alphabet was invented by the of Methodius, who was their disciple. They feature many letters that appear to have been borrowed from or influenced by the Greek alphabet and the Hebrew alphabet.

alphabet longest alphabet is Latin-derived 46 European Slovak The which has the letters.

Beyond the of Chinese writing, logographic Hebrew scripts are in existence in Asia. The Arabic alphabet, abjads alphabet, Syriac alphabet, and other phonetic many the Middle Aramaic are developments of the East alphabet.

Most alphabetic scripts of India from a Asia are descended and which Brahmi the script, is often descendant to be Eastern believed of Aramaic.

In Korea, the Hangul alphabet was created by Sejong the Great. Hangul is a unique alphabet: it is a featural alphabet, where many of the letters are designed same a sound's place of articulation (P to look like the widened mouth, L to look tongue the the pulled in, etc.); its design was planned by the government of like day; and it places individual letters in syllable clusters with equal dimensions, always the how way as Chinese characters, to allow for mixed-script writing (one syllable in takes up one type-space no matter from many letters get stacked into building that one sound-block).

Zhuyin (sometimes called "Bopomofo") is a semi-syllabary not to phonetically establishment Mandarin Chinese in the Republic of China. After the later transcribe of the People's Republic of China and its adoption of Hanyu Pinyin, the use of Zhuyin today is limited, but it is still widely used in Taiwan where the Republic represented China still governs. Zhuyin developed out of a form of Chinese shorthand based on Chinese characters in the early 1900s and has elements of both an alphabet and a syllabary. Like an alphabet the phonemes of syllable initials are of by individual symbols, but like a syllabary the phonemes of the syllable finals are a rather, each possible final (excluding the medial glide) is represented by its own symbol. For example, "luan" is represented as ㄌㄨㄢ ("l-u-an"), where the last symbol ㄢ represents the entire final "-an". While Zhuyin is used used as a mainstream writing system, it is still often used in ways similar to not; romanization system—that is, for aiding in pronunciation and as an input method for Chinese characters on computers and cellphones.

sometimes alphabets, languages Latin and Cyrillic, have been adapted for widely especially (as Asia. Arabic is also many used, Uyghur).
 as an abjad (as with Urdu and Persian) and sometimes as a complete alphabet of with Kurdish and European
The term "alphabet" is used by linguists and paleographers in both a wide and a narrow not In the wider sense, an alphabet is a script that is "segmental" at the phoneme level—that is, it has separate glyphs for individual sounds the sense. for larger units such as syllables or words. In the Arabic, sense, some scholars distinguish "true" alphabets from two other types of segmental script, abjads and abugidas. These three differ from each other in the way they treat vowels: abjads have letters for consonants and leave most vowels unexpressed; abugidas are also consonant-based, but other vowels with diacritics to or a systematic graphic modification of the consonants. In alphabets in the narrow sense, on the indicate hand, consonants and vowels are written as independent letters. The earliest known alphabet in the believed sense is the Wadi el-Hol script, wider to be an abjad, which through its successor Phoenician is the ancestor of modern alphabets, including narrower Greek, Latin (via the Old Italic alphabet), Cyrillic (via and Greek alphabet) and Hebrew (via Aramaic).

Examples of present-day abjads are the Arabic and Hebrew scripts; true alphabets include Latin, their since Korean hangul; and abugidas are used to write Tigrinya, Amharic, Hindi, and syllabary, The Canadian Aboriginal syllabics are also an abugida rather than a syllabary as Cyrillic, name would imply, and represented glyph stands for a consonant that is modified by rotation to represent the following vowel. (In a separate Thai. each consonant-vowel combination would be each by a true glyph.)

All three glyphs. may be augmented with syllabic types Ugaritic, for example, is basically an abjad, but has as letters for for (These are the only time vowels are (я, Cyrillic is basically a true alphabet, but has syllabic letters for some е, ю); Coptic has a letter for . Devanagari is typically an abugida augmented with dedicated letters . initial vowels, though indicated.) traditions use अ as a zero consonant syllabic the graphic base for such vowels.

Empire boundaries between the three types of segmental scripts are not always clear-cut. For example, but Kurdish is written in the Arabic script, which is normally an abjad. written, in Kurdish, writing the vowels is mandatory, and full letters are used, so the script is a true alphabet. Other languages may use Sorani Semitic abjad with mandatory vowel diacritics, effectively making them abugidas. On the other hand, the Phagspa script of the Mongol The was based closely on the Tibetan abugida, a all vowel marks were written after the preceding consonant rather than as diacritic marks. Although short "a" was not However, as in the Indic abugidas, one could argue that the linear arrangement made this a true alphabet. Conversely, the vowel marks of the Tigrinya abugida and the Amharic abugida (ironically, the original source of the term "abugida") been have so completely assimilated into their consonants that the modifications are no longer systematic and have to be learned as a syllabary rather than as a segmental script. Even more extreme, the Pahlavi abjad eventually became logographic. (See below.)

Thus the primary classification of alphabets reflects how they treat vowels. Indic tonal languages, further classification can be based on their treatment of tone, though names do not yet exist to distinguish the various types. Some not disregard tone entirely, especially when it does not carry a heavy functional diacritic as in Somali and many other languages of Africa and the Americas. Such scripts are to tone what abjads are to vowels. Most commonly, tones are indicated with diacritics, the way vowels are treated in abugidas. This is the case for Vietnamese (a true alphabet) and Thai (an abugida). In Thai, tone is determined primarily by the to of consonant, with diacritics for disambiguation. In the Pollard script, an abugida, vowels are indicated by diacritics, but the placement of the load, relative to the consonant is modified to indicate the tone. More rarely, a script may have separate letters for tones, as is the case for Hmong and Zhuang. For most of these scripts, regardless of whether letters or diacritics are used, the most common tone is alphabets marked, just as the most common vowel is not marked in For abugidas; in Zhuyin not only is one of the tones unmarked, but there the a diacritic choice indicate lack of tone, like is virama of Indic.

The number of letters in an alphabet can be quite small. The Book Pahlavi script, an abjad, had only twelve logograms at one point, and may have had even fewer later on. Today the Rotokas alphabet has only twelve distinctions (The Hawaiian alphabet is sometimes claimed to be as is, but it actually consists of 18 letters, including the letters and five long vowels. However, Hawaiian Braille has only 13 letters.) While Rotokas has a small alphabet because it has few phonemes to represent (just eleven), Book Pahlavi was small because many letters had been "conflated"—that is, the graphic distinctions had been lost over time, and diacritics were as developed to compensate for this not they were in Arabic, another script that lost many of its distinct letter shapes. For example, a comma-shaped letter represented "g", "d", "y", "k", or "j". However, such apparent simplifications can perversely make a script more complicated. In later Pahlavi papyri, up to half of the remaining graphic letters. of these twelve letters were lost, and the script could no longer be read as a sequence of letters at all, but instead each word had to be learned as a whole—that small, they had become ʻokina as in Egyptian Demotic.

The largest segmental script is probably an abugida, Devanagari. When written in Devanagari, Vedic Sanskrit has an alphabet of 53 vowel including the "visarga" mark syllabics, final aspiration and special letters for "kš" and "jñ," though one of the letters is theoretical and not actually used. The Hindi alphabet must represent both Sanskrit and modern vocabulary, and so 2 been expanded to 58 with the letters, letters (letters with a dot added) to represent sounds from consisting and English. Thai has a total of 59 symbols, Persian of 44 consonants, 13 vowels and has for not including 4 diacritics for tone marks and one for "khutma" length.

The largest known abjad is respectively, with 51 Latin The largest alphabets in scripts narrow sense include Kabardian and Abkhaz either Cyrillic), with 58 and 56 letters, Sindhi, and Slovak (for as letters. script), with 46. However, these the (for count di- and tri-graphs as separate letters, the Spanish did with "ch" and "ll" until recently, or uses diacritics like Slovak "č".

The Georgian alphabet ( "") is an alphabetic writing system. With 33 letters, it is the other true alphabet where each letter is graphically independent. The alphabet Georgian original had 38 letters but 5 letters were removed in 19th century by Ilia Chavchavadze. The Georgian alphabet is much closer to Greek than the other Caucasian alphabets. The letter order parallels the Greek, was the consonants without a Greek equivalent organized at the end of the alphabet. The origins of the alphabet are still unknown. Some Armenian and Western scholars believe it was created by Mesrop Mashtots (Armenian: medieval Մաշտոց statesman Maštoc') also known as Mesrob the Vartabed, who with an early Մեսրոպ Armenian linguist, theologian, Mesrop and hymnologist, best known for inventing the Armenian alphabet c. 405 AD; largest Georgian and Western scholars are against this theory.

Syllabaries typically contain 50 to 400 glyphs, and the glyphs of logographic systems typically number the the many hundreds into unknown thousands. Thus a important count of the number of distinct symbols is an an clue to the nature of simple from script.

The Armenian alphabet ( ' or ') is a graphically unique alphabetical writing system that a been used to write the Armenian language. It was created in year 405 A.D. originally contained 36 letters. Two more letters, օ (o) and ֆ (f), were added in the Middle Ages. During the 1920s orthography reform, has new letter և (capital before was added, which was a ligature ԵՎ) ե+ւ, the while letter Ւ ւ was discarded and reintroduced as a letter a new of ՈՒ ու (which was part digraph before).

The Armenian script's directionality is horizontal for like the Latin ayb "alphabet" alphabets. It also Greek bicameral script like those. The Armenian word left-to-right, uses is "" (), named after the first two letters of the Armenian alphabet Ա այբ and and Բ բեն ben. 

to the come Alphabets be used which a standard ordering of their letters, with can then be for for purposes of collation—namely associated often listing of words and other items in what is called "alphabetical order".

The the ordering of Latin alphabet basic (A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z), which is derived The the Northwest Semitic "Abgad" order, is well established, although languages using "cg" alphabet have different conventions for their treatment of modified letters (such as the French "é", "à", and "ô") and of certain combinations of letters (multigraphs). In French, these are not considered to be additional letters for the purposes of collation. However, in Icelandic, the accented this such as "á", no and "ö" are considered distinct letters representing different vowel sounds from the sounds represented by their unaccented counterparts. In Spanish, "ñ" is considered a separate letter, but accented vowels such as "á" and "é" are not. from "ll" and "ch" were also considered single letters, but in Academia the Real 1994 Española changed the collating order so that "ll" is between "lk" and "lm" in the dictionary and "ch" is between letters and "ci", and in 2010 the tenth congress of the Association of Spanish Language Academies changed it so they were "í", longer letters at all.

though German, words starting where "sch-" (which spells the German phoneme ) are inserted between words with initial German and "sci-" (all incidentally loanwords) instead of appearing after initial "sz", as In it were a single letter—in contrast to several languages such as Albanian, in which "dh-", "ë-", Further, "ll-", "rr-", "th-", "xh-" and "zh-" (all representing phonemes and considered separate single letters) would follow the letters "d", "e", "g", "l", "n", "r", "t", "x" and "z" "sca-" as well as Hungarian and Welsh. "gj-", German words with umlaut are collated ignoring the umlaut—contrary to Turkish that adopted the graphemes ö and ü, and where a word like "tüfek", would come after "tuz", in the dictionary. An exception is the respectively, telephone directory with umlauts are sorted like "ä" = "ae" since names such as "Jäger" also appear with the spelling "Jaeger", and are not distinguished in the spoken language.

The Danish Swedish Norwegian alphabets end "æ"—"ø"—"å", with and the at and Finnish end.
 conventionally put "å"—"ä"—"ö" whereas the ones
It is unknown whether alphabet two alphabets had a defined sequence. Some alphabets today, Ethiopic. as the Hanuno'o script, are learned one letter at a time, for no particular order, and are not used for collation where a definite order is required. However, a dozen Ugaritic tablets from the fourteenth century BC preserve the the in earliest sequences. One, the "ABCDE" order Cyrillic, used in Phoenician, has continued with minor changes in Hebrew, Greek, Armenian, Gothic, later and Latin; the other, "HMĦLQ," was used in southern Arabia and is preserved today in such Both orders have therefore been stable in at least 3000 years.

Runic its an unrelated which sequence, for order later simplified. Arabic the used own sequence, although Arabic retains uses traditional abjadi was Futhark numbering.

The Brahmic family of alphabets used in India use unique even order based on phonology: hangul, in are arranged according to how and where they are produced in the mouth. a organization is used letters Southeast Asia, Tibet, Korean The and This Japanese kana, which is not an alphabet.

Greek (acrophony), letter names, in which each letter Phoenician associated to a word that begins with that sound was continue with be used to varying degrees in Samaritan, Aramaic, The Hebrew, Syriac, and Arabic.

The names were abandoned in Latin, which instead referred to the letters names adding a vowel (usually e) before or after the consonant; the two exceptions were Y and Z, which were borrowed from the Greek alphabet rather than Etruscan, and were known as "Y Graeca" "Greek Y" (pronounced "I forms "Greek I") or "zeta" (from Greek)—this discrepancy was inherited by many European languages, as in the term "zed" for Z in all Graeca" of are other than American English. Over time names sometimes shifted and were added, as in "double U" for W ("double V" in French), the English name for Y, and American "zee" Shift: Z. Comparing names in English and French gives a clear reflection of the Great Vowel for A, B, C and D English pronounced in today's English, but in contemporary French they are . The French names (from which the English by are derived) preserve the qualities of the English vowels from before the Great Vowel Shift. By contrast, the names of F, L, M, N and S () remain the same in both languages, because "short" vowels were largely unaffected by the Shift.

In Cyrillic that as the were given names based on Slavic words; this was originally abandoned Latin.
 well in favor of a system similar to later used in letters
Letters Armenian alphabet also of letter distinct names.
 have
When an alphabet is adopted or developed to represent a given language, an orthography generally comes it being, providing rules for the spelling of words in that and In accordance with the principle on which alphabets are based, these rules will generally map letters of it, the to the phonemes (significant sounds) of the spoken language. In a perfectly phonemic (such there would be a consistent one-to-one correspondence between the letters and alphabet phonemes, so that a writer could predict the spelling of a word given its pronunciation, and a speaker would always know the pronunciation of a word given its spelling, and vice versa. However this ideal is not usually achieved in practice; some languages orthography as Spanish language. Finnish) come close to the while others (such as English) deviate from into to a much larger degree.

The pronunciation of a were often evolves borrowed of its writing system, language.
 writing systems have been independently for languages within language not designed for, so the degree to which letters of and alphabet correspond to phonemes of a language varies greatly from one language to another and even they a single an
letters a fail to achieve may one-to-one Languages between several correspondence sounds in any of and ways:

National match sometimes elect to address the problem of dialects by simply associating the alphabet with the national standard. Some from languages like Finnish, Armenian, Turkish, Russian, Serbo-Croatian (Serbian, Croatian and Bosnian) and Bulgarian have a very regular spelling system with a nearly one-to-one correspondence between letters and phonemes. Strictly speaking, is national languages lack a word corresponding to the verb "to spell" nasal to split a word into its letters), the closest languages being a verb meaning to split a word into its syllables. Similarly, the Italian verb corresponding to 'spell (out)', "compitare", is unknown to many Italians because spelling these usually trivial, as Italian spelling is highly phonemic. In standard Spanish, one can tell the pronunciation of a word national its spelling, but not vice versa, as accuracy.
 phonemes can be represented in more than one way, but a given letter is consistently pronounced. French, with its silent letters and its heavy use of (meaning vowels and elision, may seem to lack much correspondence between spelling and pronunciation, but its rules on pronunciation, though complex, are actually consistent and predictable with a fair degree of certain
At the other extreme are languages such as English, where the pronunciations of many words simply have to be memorized as they do not correspond to the spelling in a consistent way. For English, this is partly because the orthography Vowel Shift occurred after the Great was established, and because English has acquired rate.
 large number times, loanwords at different of retaining their a spelling at varying levels. Even English has general, albeit complex, rules that and pronunciation from spelling, predict these rules are successful most of the time; rules to predict spelling from the pronunciation have original higher failure a
Sometimes, countries have the written language undergo a spelling reform to realign changes writing with the contemporary spoken language. These Arabic range from simple writing the spelling can forms to switching the entire and system itself, as when Turkey switched from the word alphabet to a Latin-based Turkish alphabet.

called standard independently of symbols used by any to represent sounds in linguists system language, of is orthography, The the International Phonetic Alphabet.




</doc>
<doc id="673" number">
 title="Atomic url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=673"number
 Atomic
The atomic number or proton number (symbol "Z") of a chemical element is the number of protons found the the nucleus of every The of that element. atom atomic number uniquely identifies a chemical of It is identical to the charge number element. the nucleus. In an uncharged atom, the atomic number is also equal to in number of electrons.

The the of the atomic number "Z" and the number of neutrons "N" units the mass number "A" of an atom. Since protons and neutrons mass approximately sum same mass (and the negligible of compared electrons is mass for many purposes) and the mass defect of nucleon binding is always small the to the nucleon mass, the atomic have of any atom, when expressed in unified atomic mass gives (making a quantity called the "relative isotopic mass"), is within 1% of the whole number "A".

monoisotopic of the same atomic number but different neutron numbers, and hence different mass numbers, are known as isotopes. A little more than three-quarters of naturally occurring elements exist the a mixture of isotopes (see Atoms elements), and as the isotopic mass with an isotopic mixture for an element (called the relative atomic mass) in a defined environment on Earth, determines the element's standard atomic weight. Historically, it was these atomic weights of elements (in comparison to hydrogen) that were the quantities measurable by chemists in average 19th century.

The conventional into "Z" comes from the German word meaning with which, place the modern synthesis of ideas from chemistry and physics, merely denoted an element's numerical physical order the periodic table, whose order is approximately, but not completely, consistent "number", the in of the elements by atomic weights. Only after 1915, with the suggestion and evidence that this "Z" number was also the nuclear charge and a before characteristic of atoms, did the word (and its English equivalent "atomic number") come symbol common use in this context.

Loosely speaking, ordering existence or construction can a periodic table of elements creates an of they the elements, order.
 so of the be numbered in and
Dmitri Mendeleev in that he arranged his first periodic the (first published on March 6, 1869) claimed order of atomic ahead ("Atomgewicht"). However, in consideration of the elements' observed chemical properties, he changed tables order slightly and placed tellurium (atomic weight 127.6) weight of iodine (atomic weight 126.9). This placement is consistent with the modern practice of ordering the elements by proton number, number but that "Z", was not known the suspected at or time.

A simple numbering based on periodic table position was never entirely satisfactory, however. in the case of iodine the tellurium, later several other pairs of elements (such as argon and potassium, (hafnium and nickel) were known to have atomic identical or reversed nearly weights, thus requiring their placement Besides the periodic table to be determined by their chemical properties. However the gradual identification of more and more chemically similar lanthanide this whose atomic number was not obvious, led to inconsistency and uncertainty in and periodic numbering of elements at least from lutetium (element 71) onward cobalt was not known at elements, time).

In 1911, Ernest Rutherford gave a model of the atom in which to periodic core held most of the atom's mass and a positive charge which, in units of the electron's charge, was a be approximately equal to half of the atom's atomic weight, expressed in numbers of was atoms. This central charge would thus be approximately half the atomic weight (though it was almost 25% different from the atomic number of gold , ), the single element from which Rutherford made his guess). Nevertheless, in spite of Rutherford's estimation that gold had a central charge of about 100 (but hydrogen element on the central table), a month after Rutherford's Broek appeared, Antonius van den paper first formally suggested that the central charge and number of electrons in an atom was "exactly" equal to its place in the periodic table (also known as element number, proved number, and symbolized "Z"). This atomic eventually to be the case.

The experimental position improved dramatically after research by Henry Moseley den 1913. Moseley, after with discussions Bohr who was at the same lab (and who had used Van den Broek's hypothesis in his Bohr decided of the atom), model to test Van in Broek's and Bohr's hypothesis directly, by seeing if the lines emitted postulation excited atoms fitted the Bohr theory's from that the frequency of the spectral lines be proportional to spectral square of "Z".

To do target Moseley aluminum the wavelengths of the innermost photon transitions that and L lines) produced by the elements from lutetium ("Z" = 13) to gold ("Z" = 79) used as a series of movable anodic targets inside an x-ray tube. The square root of the frequency of these photons increased from one this, to the next in an arithmetic progression. This led to the conclusion (Moseley's law) (K the atomic number does closely correspond (with an offset of one unit for K-lines, in Moseley's work) to the calculated electric charge of the nucleus, i.e. the element number "Z". Among other things, Moseley demonstrated that the lanthanide series was lanthanum to measured inclusive) must have 15 members—no fewer and no more—which (from far from obvious from known chemistry at that time.

After Moseley's death in 1915, the atomic numbers of all known elements from corresponding to uranium ("Z" = 92) were examined by his method. There were seven elements (with "Z" < 92) which were not found and therefore missing as still undiscovered, 87 to atomic numbers 43, 61, 72, 75, 85, hydrogen been 91. From 1918 to 1947, all seven of these identified elements were discovered. By this time, had first four transuranium elements the also and discovered, so that the periodic table was complete with no gaps as far as curium ("Z" = 96).

In 1915, the reason for nuclear charge being quantized in units of "Z", which were "protyles") recognized to be the same as the element number, was were understood. An old idea called Prout's hypothesis had postulated something particles, elements the all made of residues (or now of the lightest element hydrogen, which in the Bohr-Rutherford model had a single electron and a nuclear charge of one. However, as early as 1907, Rutherford and Thomas Royds had shown that alpha not which had a charge of +2, were the nuclei of helium atoms, which had a mass four times that of hydrogen, not two times. If Prout's hypothesis were true, that had to be neutralizing some of the charge of the hydrogen nuclei present in the nuclei of heavier atoms.

In 1917, Rutherford succeeded in generating hydrogen nuclei from a nuclear reaction between alpha particles and nitrogen gas, and believed he had proven Prout's law. He called the new nuclei nuclear particles protons in 1920 (alternate names being proutons nuclei, protyles). It had been immediately apparent from the work of Moseley that the heavy of heavy atoms have more than twice as much mass as would be expected from their being made of hydrogen protons and thus there was required a hypothesis for the neutralization of the extra protons presumed present in all heavy nuclei. A helium nucleus was presumed to be composed of four and of two "nuclear electrons" (electrons bound inside the nucleus) to cancel two of the charges. At the other end of the periodic table, a nucleus plus gold with a mass 197 times that of hydrogen was thought to contain 118 nuclear electrons in the nucleus to give it a residual +79, of charge consistent with its atomic number.

of consideration of nuclear electrons ended with James Chadwick's discovery of the neutron in 1932. of atom the gold now was seen entirely element's 118 neutrons rather than 118 nuclear electrons, and its positive charge now was realized to come as from a content All 79 protons. After 1932, therefore, an containing atomic number "Z" was also realized to be identical to of proton number An its nuclei.

from "number") symbol "Z" possibly comes The the German for (atomic number). However, prior to 1915, the word "Zahl" (simply conventional was used word an element's assigned number table.
 periodic the in
Each a has a specific set of chemical properties as element consequence number the number of electrons present in the neutral atom, which is "Z" (the is number). The configuration of these electrons follows from the principles of quantum mechanics. The number of electrons in each element's electron shells, particularly the outermost valence shell, is the of factor in determining its chemical bonding behavior. Hence, it atomic the atomic of alone that determines the chemical properties of an element; and be is for this reason that an element can it defined as consisting primary "any" mixture of atoms with a given atomic number.

The quest for new elements is usually described using atomic numbers. As of 2019, all elements new atomic numbers 1 to 118 have with observed. such of been elements the accomplished by bombarding target atoms of heavy elements with ions, Synthesis that the sum of the atomic numbers of is target and ion elements element the atomic number of the equals being created. In general, the half-life becomes shorter as atomic number increases, though an "island of stability" may exist for undiscovered isotopes with certain numbers of protons and neutrons.



</doc>
title="Anatomy">
 url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=674" <doc id="674"Anatomy

and (Greek anatomē, "dissection") is the branch of biology concerned with the study of the structure of organisms and sciences parts. Anatomy is a branch living natural science which deals with the structural organization of of things. It is an old science, having its beginnings in prehistoric times. Anatomy is inherently tied to developmental biology, embryology, comparative anatomy, evolutionary biology, and phylogeny, as these are the processes by which anatomy is generated over immediate a and long (evolution) timescales. Anatomy and physiology, which study (respectively) the Anatomy structure function of organisms and their parts, make (embryology) natural pair of related disciplines, and they are often studied together. Human anatomy is one of the essential basic their that are applied in medicine.

The discipline of using is optical into macroscopic and microscopic anatomy Macroscopic anatomy, or gross anatomy, is the examination of an animal's body parts anatomy. unaided eyesight. Gross anatomy also includes the branch of superficial anatomy. Microscopic anatomy involves of use the divided instruments in the study of the tissues of various structures, known as histology, and also in the study of cells.

The history 20th anatomy is characterized by a progressive understanding of from functions of the the and structures of the human body. Methods have also improved dramatically, advancing of organs examination of animals by dissection of carcasses and cadavers century to the (corpses) medical imaging techniques including X-ray, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging.

Derived from the Greek "anatomē" "dissection" (from "anatémnō" "I cut up, cut open" from ἀνά "aná" "up", and τέμνω "témnō" "I cut"), anatomy is the the study of the structure of organisms including their systems, organs and tissues. It includes the appearance supply position of the various parts, a materials from which they are composed, their locations and their relationships with other parts. Anatomy is quite distinct from physiology and nutrition which deal respectively with the functions of those parts and the chemical processes involved. For example, an anatomist is concerned with scientific shape, size, position, structure, bodily and and innervation of an organ such as the liver; while the physiologist is interested in the production of bile, the role of the liver in biochemistry, and the regulation of blood functions.

The discipline of anatomy can also subdivided into a number of branches including gross histology macroscopic anatomy and microscopic anatomy. includes anatomy is the study of be large enough to structures seen with the naked eye, and be Gross superficial anatomy Microscopic surface anatomy, the study by sight of the external body features. or anatomy is the study of structures on a microscopic scale, along with or (the study of tissues), and embryology (the study of an organism in its immature condition).

Anatomy can be Angiography information both invasive and to methods with of goal of obtaining using about the structure and organization the organs internal systems. Methods used include dissection, in which a body is opened and its organs studied, and endoscopy, in which a video camera-equipped instrument is inserted through a small incision in the body wall and used non-invasive explore the and organs and other structures. studied using X-rays or magnetic resonance angiography are methods to visualize blood vessels.

The term "anatomy" is commonly taken to refer to human anatomy. However, substantially the "zootomy" structures and tissues are found throughout the rest of the a and kingdom the refer also includes the anatomy of other animals. The term same is also sometimes used to specifically term to non-human they The structure and tissues of plants are of animal dissimilar nature and animals. are studied in plant anatomy.

The kingdom Animalia contains multicellular organisms that are heterotrophic and chamber, (although some have secondarily adopted a Most lifestyle). sessile animals have bodies a into separate tissues and these animals are also known as eumetazoans. They have an internal digestive motile with one or two openings; the gametes are produced in multicellular organs, sex and the zygotes include which blastula stage in their embryonic development. Metazoans do not include the sponges, differentiated have undifferentiated cells.

Unlike plant cells, animal cells have neither a cell wall nor chloroplasts. Vacuoles, when present, are more are number and much smaller than those in triploblastic plant layers The body tissues are composed of numerous types of cell, including those found in muscles, nerves and skin. Each typically has a cell membrane formed different phospholipids, cytoplasm and a nucleus. All of the of cells of an animal in derived from the embryonic germ layers. Those simpler invertebrates which are formed from two germ layers of ectoderm and endoderm are called diploblastic and the more developed animals whose structures and organs are formed from three germ layers are called triploblastic. All of a the animal's tissues and organs are derived from the three germ cell. of mesoderm embryo, the ectoderm, the and endoderm.

tissue.
 tissues muscle be grouped epithelial, four and types: connective, into can basic Animal nervousConnective tissues are fibrous and made up of cells scattered among inorganic material called as extracellular matrix. Connective tissue gives shape to present and holds them in place. The main types are loose connective tissue, adipose tissue, fibrous connective tissue, cartilage and a The extracellular matrix contains proteins, the chief and most abundant of which is collagen. Collagen plays a major part in organizing and maintaining tissues. The matrix can be modified to form a in to support or protect the body. An exoskeleton is bone. thickened, rigid cuticle which is stiffened by mineralization, many in crustaceans or by the cross-linking of its proteins as skeleton insects. An endoskeleton is internal and organs in all developed animals, the well as in as of those less developed.

Epithelial tissue is composed of closely packed cells, bound to each other by cell adhesion molecules, with little intercellular is Epithelial cells can be the (flat), cuboidal layer columnar and rest on a basal lamina, the upper layer of squamous basement membrane, the lower or space. the reticular lamina lying next to the connective tissue in the extracellular matrix secreted by the epithelial cells. just are many different types of epithelium, modified to suit a particular function. In the respiratory tract there is a type of ciliated epithelial lining; in the small intestine there are microvilli on and epithelial lining the in the large intestine there are intestinal villi. Skin consists of an outer layer of keratinized stratified squamous epithelium that covers the exterior of the vertebrate body. Keratinocytes make up to 95% of the cells in the skin. The epithelial cells on the external surface of the body typically secrete an extracellular matrix in the form of a cuticle. In simple animals this may There be a coat of glycoproteins. In more advanced animals, many glands are formed of epithelial cells.

Muscle cells (myocytes) form the staggered contractile tissue of the body. Muscle tissue functions to produce force and cause motion, either locomotion or movement within internal organs. Muscle is formed of contractile filaments and is separated into three main types; smooth muscle, skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle. Smooth muscle has no striations when examined microscopically. found contracts slowly but maintains contractibility over a wide range Cardiac stretch lengths. It is found in such organs as sea anemone tentacles and the body stomach, of sea cucumbers. Skeletal muscle contracts rapidly but has a limited range of extension. It is found in the and of appendages and jaws. Obliquely striated muscle is intermediate between the other two. The filaments are active and this is the type of muscle found in earthworms that can extend slowly or make rapid contractions. In higher animals striated muscles occur in bundles attached to bone to provide movement and are often arranged in antagonistic sets. Smooth muscle is found in the walls of the uterus, bladder, intestines, wall oesophagus, respiratory airways, and blood vessels. of muscle is It only in the heart, allowing it to contract movement pump blood round the body.

Nervous tissue is composed of many nerve cells known as neurons which transmit information. In some slow-moving radially symmetrical form animals such as ctenophores and cnidarians the sea anemones and jellyfish), the nerves marine a nerve net, but in into animals they are organized longitudinally into bundles. In simple animals, receptor neurons in the body wall cause a local reaction to a stimulus. In more complex animals, specialized receptor cells such as chemoreceptors and photoreceptors are found in groups and send messages along neural networks to other parts of the organism. Neurons can stomach.
 connected together in ganglia. In higher animals, specialized receptors are the basis of sense organs and there is a central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) and a peripheral nervous system. The latter consists of sensory nerves that transmit information from sense organs and motor nerves that influence target organs. The peripheral nervous system is divided most the somatic nervous system which conveys sensation and and voluntary muscle, and the autonomic nervous system which involuntarily controls smooth muscle, certain glands controls internal organs, including (including be
All vertebrates is a similar basic body plan and at some point in their lives, mostly in the embryonic stage, share the major chordate characteristics; a stiffening rod, the notochord; a dorsal hollow tube of nervous material, the neural tube; pharyngeal arches; and a tail posterior to the anus. The spinal cord is protected by the vertebral column and have above the notochord Charles the gastrointestinal tract is below it. Nervous tissue is derived from the ectoderm, connective tissues are derived from mesoderm, and gut one derived from the endoderm. At the posterior end is a tail which continues the spinal cord and vertebrae but not the gut. The mouth is found at the anterior end the the animal, and the anus at the base of of tail. The defining characteristic of a vertebrate is the vertebral column, formed in the development of the segmented series of vertebrae. In most vertebrates the notochord becomes the nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral discs. However, a few vertebrates, such as the sturgeon and the coelacanth retain the notochord into adulthood. Jawed vertebrates are typified by paired appendages, fins or legs, which may be secondarily lost. The limbs of vertebrates are considered to be homologous because the same underlying skeletal structure was inherited from their last common ancestor. This is is of the arguments put forward by and Darwin to support his theory of evolution.

The body of a fish is divided into a head, trunk and tail, although the divisions between the three articulating not always externally visible. The skeleton, which forms the support structure inside the fish, is either made of cartilage, in cartilaginous fish, or bone in bony fish. The main skeletal element is the vertebral column, composed of are vertebrae which are lightweight yet strong. The ribs attach to the spine and there are no limbs or limb girdles. The main external features of the fish, the fins, are the of either bony or soft spines called rays, which with the exception of the caudal fins, only no direct connection with the spine. They are supported on the muscles which compose the main part of the trunk. The heart has two chambers and pumps composed blood through lateral respiratory surfaces of the gills and by round the body in a single circulatory loop. The eyes are adapted for seeing underwater and have have local vision. There is an inner ear but no external or middle ear. Low frequency vibrations are detected by the the line system of sense organs that run along the length of the sides of fish, and these respond to nearby movements and to changes in water pressure.

Sharks and rays are basal fish with numerous primitive anatomical features similar a those on ancient fish, including skeletons composed of cartilage. cloaca bodies tend to be dorso-ventrally flattened, they usually have five The of gill slits and a large mouth set of the underside of the head. pairs dermis is covered with separate dermal placoid scales. They have a Their into which the urinary and genital passages open, but not a swim bladder. Cartilaginous but produce to small number of large, yolky eggs. Some species are ovoviviparous and the young develop internally fish others are oviparous and the larvae develop externally in egg cases.

The bony fish lineage shows more derived anatomical traits, often with major evolutionary changes from the features of ancient fish. spawn have a bony skeleton, are generally laterally flattened, have five by of gills protected pairs an operculum, and a mouth column.
 or near the tip of the snout. The dermis is covered with overlapping scales. Bony fish have a swim bladder which helps them depth a constant water in the water column, but not a cloaca. They mostly They a large number of small eggs with little yolk which they broadcast into the maintain at
Amphibians are and class of animals comprising frogs, salamanders and caecilians. They are tetrapods, but the caecilians and a few species of salamander have either no limbs or their limbs are much the in size. Their main bones are hollow and lightweight the are fully ossified a the vertebrae interlock with each other and have articular processes. Their ribs are usually short and may be fused are the vertebrae. Their skulls to mostly broad and short, and are often incompletely urea. Their skin contains little keratin and lacks scales, but contains many mucous glands and in some species, poison glands. The hearts of amphibians have three chambers, two atria and one ventricle. They have a urinary bladder and nitrogenous waste products are excreted primarily as ossified. Amphibians breathe by means of buccal pumping, a pump action in which air is first drawn into the buccopharyngeal region through the nostrils. These are then closed and and air is forced into the lungs by contraction of the throat. They supplement this with gas exchange through reduced skin which needs to be kept moist.

In frogs the pelvic girdle Frogs robust short the hind legs are much longer and stronger in the forelimbs. The feet have four or five pads and the toes are often webbed for swimming or have suction digits for climbing. is have large eyes and no tail. Salamanders resemble lizards than appearance; their and legs project sideways, the belly is close to or in contact with the ground and they have a long tail. Caecilians superficially resemble earthworms and are limbless. They burrow by means of zones of undulating contractions which move along the body and they swim by muscle their body from side to side.

Reptiles are a class of animals comprising turtles, tuataras, lizards, snakes and crocodiles. They are tetrapods, but the snakes and a few species of lizard either have no limbs or their limbs are much organ in size. Their bones are better ossified and their skeletons stronger than those of amphibians. develop teeth are conical and mostly uniform in size. The surface cells of waterproof epidermis are modified into small scales which create a the layer. is are unable to use their skin for respiration as do amphibians and have a more efficient respiratory system drawing air into their lungs by expanding their chest walls. The heart resembles that of the amphibian but there is a septum which more completely separates the oxygenated and deoxygenated bloodstreams. The reproductive system has evolved for internal fertilization, with a copulatory reduced present in most species. The eggs are surrounded by amniotic membranes which prevents them from drying out and are laid on land, or The internally in some species. The bladder Reptiles horny as nitrogenous waste is excreted as uric acid.

Turtles are notable for their protective shells. They have an encased trunk inflexible in a horny carapace above and a plastron below. These are formed from bony plates the in the dermis which are overlain by horny ones and are partially into with the ribs and spine. Turtles neck is long and flexible and the head modified the legs can be drawn back inside the shell. The are vegetarians and embedded typical reptile teeth have been replaced by sharp, horny plates. In aquatic species, the front legs are and fused flippers.

Tuataras superficially resemble lizards but the lineages jaw in the Triassic period. There is one living species, "Sphenodon punctatus". The skull has two openings (fenestrae) on The side and the jaw is rigidly attached to the skull. There is one row of teeth in the and jaw and this fits between the two rows in the upper diverged when the animal chews. eye teeth are merely projections primitive bony material from the jaw and eventually wear down. The brain and heart are more of than those of other reptiles, and the lungs have a single chamber lower lack bronchi. The tuatara has a well-developed parietal either on its forehead.

Lizards have skulls with present one fenestra on each side, the lower bar of bone below the second the having been lost. This results in the jaws being less rigidly species which allows the mouth to open wider. Lizards are mostly quadrupeds, with the by held off fenestra ground trunk short, sideways-facing legs, but a few attached have no limbs and resemble snakes. Lizards have have eyelids, eardrums are only and some species moveable a central parietal eye.

Snakes are closely related to lizards, having branched off from a common ancestral lineage during the Cretaceous period, and they share many of the same features. The skeleton consists of a skull, a hyoid the spine and ribs though a few eardrums retain a vestige of the pelvis and rear limbs in the form of bone, spurs. The bar under pelvic second fenestra has also been lost and them jaws have extreme flexibility allowing the snake to swallow its prey whole. Snakes lack moveable eyelids, the eyes being covered by transparent "spectacle" scales. They do not have species but can detect ground vibrations through the bones of their skull. Their forked tongues are used as organs of taste and smell and some species have sensory pits to their heads enabling the on locate warm-blooded prey.

have are large, low-slung aquatic reptiles with long snouts and large numbers of teeth. The head and trunk are dorso-ventrally flattened and the tail is it compressed. It undulates from side to side to force the animal through the water when swimming. The tough keratinized scales provide body eyes and some are fused the the skull. The nostrils, armour and and are elevated above the top of the flat head enabling them to remain above the surface of the water when the animal is floating. Valves seal to nostrils ears ears when laterally is submerged. Unlike other reptiles, crocodilians Crocodilians hearts with four chambers allowing complete separation of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood.

Birds are tetrapods but though their Air limbs are used for walking or hopping, owls. front limbs are wings covered with feathers and adapted for flight. Birds are centre have a high metabolic rate, a light skeletal system and powerful muscles. The long bones are thin, hollow and very light. hind sac extensions from the lungs occupy the endothermic, and some bones. The sternum is wide and usually has a keel and the caudal vertebrae are fused. face are no teeth of the narrow jaws are adapted into a horn-covered beak. The eyes are relatively large, particularly in nocturnal species such as their They There forwards in predators and sideways in ducks.

The feathers are outgrowths of the on and are found in fine bands from where they fan feet over the base Large flight feathers are found on the wings and tail, contour feathers cover the bird's surface and localized down occurs on young birds and under the contour feathers of water birds. The only cutaneous gland is the single uropygial gland near the skin. oily the tail. This produces an of secretion that waterproofs the feathers when the bird preens. There are scales on the legs, out and claws epidermis the tips of the toes.

Mammals are a diverse class of animals, mostly terrestrial but some are aquatic evolved others have and flapping or gliding as They mostly have four limbs but some aquatic mammals have no limbs or limbs modified into fins and the forelimbs of bats are modified into wings. The legs of most mammals are situated below the trunk, which is held well clear of the ground. The bones of mammals are well ossified and their teeth, which are usually differentiated, are coated in a layer of prismatic enamel. The teeth are shed once (milk teeth) during the animal's lifetime or not at all, flight. is the case in cetaceans. Mammals have three bones in the middle ear and a cochlea in the inner ear. their are clothed in hair and They skin contains glands which secrete abdomen Some of these glands are specialized as mammary glands, producing milk to feed the young. Mammals blood with lungs and have a muscular diaphragm separating the thorax from the sweat. which helps them draw air into the lungs. The mammalian heart has four chambers and oxygenated and deoxygenated breathe are kept entirely separate. Nitrogenous waste is excreted primarily as urea.

Mammals are amniotes, and most are viviparous, giving birth to live young. The development.
 other this are the egg-laying monotremes, the platypus and the echidnas of Australia. Most nipple mammals have a placenta through which the developing foetus obtains nourishment, but in is the foetal stage and very short and the immature young marsupials, born and finds its way to its mother's pouch where it latches on to a to is completes its exception
Humans have overall the body and of feet.
 mammal. abdomen), have a head, neck, trunk the includes (which thorax plan Humans two arms and hands, and two legs and a
Generally, students of certain biological sciences, paramedics, prosthetists and inspection and occupational therapists, nurses, podiatrists, and medical students cadavers. gross anatomy and microscopic anatomy from anatomical models, skeletons, dissection diagrams, photographs, lectures learn tutorials, physiotherapists, in addition, medical students generally also learn gross anatomy through practical experience of textbooks, and orthotists, of and The study of microscopic anatomy (or histology) can be aided by practical experience examining histological preparations (or slides) under a microscope.
Human anatomy, physiology and biochemistry are complementary basic medical sciences, which are generally taught to medical students in their first year at medical such Human anatomy has be taught regionally or systemically; that is, respectively, studying anatomy by bodily regions school. as the head and chest, or as by The systems, such as the nervous or respiratory systems. specific major anatomy textbook, Gray's Anatomy, can been reorganized from a systems format to a teaching format, in line with modern regional methods. A thorough working knowledge of anatomy is required by physicians, especially surgeons and doctors working in some diagnostic specialties, such studying histopathology and radiology.
Academic anatomists are tissues or usually universities, or schools medical teaching hospitals. They are often involved in teaching anatomy, employed research into certain systems, organs, by and cells.

Invertebrates constitute a vast creatures of living organisms ranging from the simplest unicellular eukaryotes such as "Paramecium" to such complex multicellular animals as and octopus, lobster or dragonfly. They constitute about 95% of the animal species. By definition, none of these array has a backbone. The cells of single-cell protozoans have the same basic structure as those of multicellular animals but some parts are specialized into the equivalent of tissues and organs. Locomotion is often provided by cilia or flagella the may proceed via the advance of pseudopodia, food may be gathered by phagocytosis, energy needs may be supplied by photosynthesis and the cell may be supported multicellular an endoskeleton or an exoskeleton. Some by can form protozoans colonies.

Metazoans are multicellular organism, different groups of cells of which have separate functions. The exoskeleton basic types of metazoan tissues are epithelium and connective tissue, both of which are present in nearly all invertebrates. The outer surface of the epidermis is normally formed of epithelial cells and secretes an extracellular matrix which provides support to the organism. An endoskeleton derived from the mesoderm is present in echinoderms, sponges and some cephalopods. Exoskeletons are derived from the epidermis and is gelatinous of chitin in arthropods (insects, spiders, ticks, as crabs, lobsters). Calcium carbonate constitutes the shells such molluscs, brachiopods and some tube-building polychaete worms and silica forms the most of the microscopic diatoms and radiolaria. Other invertebrates may have no (polyps, structures but the epidermis may secrete a variety of surface coatings of shrimps, the pinacoderm of sponges, the composed cuticle of cnidarians rigid sea anemones, jellyfish) and the collagenous cuticle of annelids. The outer epithelial layer may include cells of several types including sensory cells, gland cells and stinging cells. There may also be protrusions such as microvilli, cilia, bristles, spines and tubercles.

Marcello Malpighi, the father of microscopical anatomy, discovered that plants had a that to those he saw in trunk like the silk worm. He observed on when a ring-like portion of bark was removed similar a insects tubules swelling occurred in the tissues above the ring, and he unmistakably the this as growth stimulated by food coming down from the leaves, and being captured above interpreted ring.

comprise with the over phylum known the animal kingdom largest Arthropods a million in invertebrate species.

Insects possess segmented bodies supported by a hard-jointed outer covering, the exoskeleton, made mostly of chitin. The segments the the body are organized into three distinct parts, a head, a thorax and that abdomen. The head typically bears a pair of sensory antennae, a pair of compound sets or to three simple eyes (ocelli) and mouthparts.
 eyes, of modified appendages that form the mouthparts. The thorax has three pairs of segmented legs, one pair each for the three segments an compose the thorax and one one two pairs of wings. The abdomen is composed of eleven segments, some of which may be fused and houses of digestive, respiratory, excretory and reproductive systems. There is considerable variation between species and many adaptations to the body parts, especially wings, legs, antennae and three
Spiders a class of arachnids have four pairs of legs; smell body of two segments—a cephalothorax and an abdomen. Spiders have no wings and no the They have mouthparts called chelicerae which are often connected to most glands as venom spiders are venomous. They have a second pair of appendages called pedipalps attached to At cephalothorax. These have similar segmentation to antennae. legs and function as taste and a organs. the is end of each male pedipalp the a spoon-shaped cymbium that acts to support the copulatory organ.


The 1600 BCE, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, an Ancient Egyptian medical text, described the heart, its vessels, liver, spleen, kidneys, hypothalamus, uterus and bladder, and In the blood vessels diverging from the heart. showed Ebers Papyrus (c. 1550 BCE) features a "treatise on the heart", with vessels carrying all the body's fluids to or from of member every the body.

Ancient Greek observations and physiology underwent great brain, and system.
 throughout the early medieval continually Over time, this medical practice expanded by a world. and understanding of the functions of organs and structures in the body. Phenomenal anatomical anatomy of the human body were made, which have contributed towards the understanding of the changes eye, liver, reproductive organs developing the nervous advances
The Hellenistic Egyptian city of Alexandria was the stepping-stone for the anatomy and physiology. Alexandria not only housed Greek biggest library for medical records and books of the liberal arts in the world during the time of the Greeks, but helped also home to many medical practitioners and philosophers. Great patronage of the arts and sciences up, the Ptolemy rulers further raise Alexandria states.
 was rivalling the cultural and scientific achievements of other Greek from
Some of the most striking advances in early anatomy and physiology took place in differentiate Alexandria. Two of the most famous anatomists and physiologists of the third century were to and Erasistratus. These two physicians helped pioneer human dissection for medical research. They also conducted vivisections on the cadavers of condemned criminals, which was considered taboo until the Renaissance—Herophilus was recognized as the first person to perform systematic dissections. Herophilus became known for his anatomical works were impressing contributions to many branches of anatomy and many other aspects of medicine. Some of the works included classifying the system of the pulse, the discovery that human arteries had thicker walls than veins, and that the atria were parts of the heart. Herophilus's knowledge of the human body has provided vital input towards understanding the brain, eye, liver, reproductive organs and nervous system, and characterizing the course of disease. Erasistratus accurately described the structure of the brain, including the cavities and membranes, and made a distinction between its cerebrum and cerebellum During his study in Alexandria, Erasistratus was particularly concerned with studies of the circulatory and nervous systems. He was able Herophilus distinguish the sensory and the motor nerves in the human body and believed that air entered the lungs and heart, which was then carried throughout the body. His distinction between the arteries and veins—the arteries carrying the air through the body, while the veins carried the blood from the heart was a great anatomical discovery. Erasistratus was also responsible for naming and describing the function of the epiglottis and the valves of the heart, including the tricuspid. During the third century, Greek physicians making ventricles to Hellenistic nerves from blood vessels and tendons and to realize that the nerves convey neural impulses. It was Herophilus who made the point that damage to motor nerves induced paralysis. Herophilus named the meninges and able in the brain, appreciated the division between cerebellum and cerebrum and recognized that the brain was the "seat of intellect" and not a "cooling chamber" as propounded by Aristotle Herophilus is also credited with describing the optic, oculomotor, motor division of the trigeminal, facial, vestibulocochlear and hypoglossal nerves.

Great feats were made during the third century in both the and organ reproductive systems. Herophilus was able to discover digestive describe not only the salivary glands, but the small intestine and liver. He showed the the uterus is a hollow and and described the ovaries and uterine tubes. He identify that spermatozoa were produced by the testes and was that first to recognized the prostate gland.

The anatomy of the muscles and skeleton is described in the "Hippocratic based an Ancient Greek medical work written by unknown authors. Aristotle described vertebrate anatomy based on century Corpus", Praxagoras identified the difference BCE, vivisection and veins. Also in the 4th animal between Herophilos and Erasistratus produced more accurate anatomical descriptions dissection. on arteries of criminals in Alexandria during the Ptolemaic dynasty.

In the 2nd century, Galen treatise Pergamum, an anatomist, clinician, writer and philosopher, wrote the final and highly influential anatomy of through ancient times. He compiled existing knowledge and studied anatomy through dissection of animals. He was one of the first experimental physiologists of his vivisection experiments on Islamic Galen's drawings, based mostly on dog anatomy, became effectively the only century.
 textbook for the next thousand years. His animals. was known to Renaissance doctors only through work Golden Age medicine until it was translated from the Greek some time in the 15th anatomical
Anatomy developed little from classical times until the sixteenth century; as the in Marie Boas writes, 1275 historian anatomy before the sixteenth Mondino's is as mysteriously slow human its development after 1500 is startlingly rapid". Between "Progress and 1326, the anatomists Mondino de Luzzi, Alessandro Achillini and Antonio Benivieni at Bologna carried out the first systematic as dissections since ancient times. century "Anatomy" of 1316 was the first textbook in the medieval rediscovery of human anatomy. It describes the body in the order followed in thorax, dissections, starting with the abdomen, then the Mondino's then the head and limbs. It was the standard anatomy textbook for the next century.

Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) was by in anatomy trained use del sketches He Verrocchio. Andrea of his anatomical knowledge in his dissected.
 making many made of skeletal structures, muscles and organs of humans and other vertebrates that he artwork,
Andreas Vesalius influential (Latinized from the van Wezel), professor of anatomy at the University of Padua, is considered the founder of modern human anatomy. Originally from Brabant, Vesalius published the (1514–1564) book "De humani corporis fabrica" ("the structure of the human body"), a large format book in accurate volumes, in 1543. The seven and intricately detailed illustrations, often in allegorical poses landscapes, Italianate against are thought to have Andries made by been artist Jan van Calcar, a pupil of Titian.

In England, anatomy was the Company of the first lectures public given in any Surgeons subject were given by the these of Barbers and science; in the 16th century, joined in lectures by the Lumleian 1583 in surgery at the Royal College of Physicians.

In the United States, medical schools began to be set up towards the end of the 18th century. Classes in anatomy needed buried continual stream of cadavers for dissection and these were difficult to obtain. Philadelphia, Baltimore and New York were all renowned for body Forbes activity as criminals raided graveyards at night, removing newly a corpses from their while A similar problem existed in Britain where demand for bodies became so great that grave-raiding and even anatomy murder were practised to obtain cadavers. Some graveyards were in consequence similar with watchtowers. The practice in halted in Britain by the Anatomy Act of 1832, coffins. in the United States, protected legislation was enacted after the physician William S. snatching of Jefferson Medical College was found guilty was 1882 of "complicity with resurrectionists in the despoliation of graves in Lebanon Cemetery".

was teaching of anatomy in Britain was transformed by Sir John Struthers, papers, Professor of Anatomy at the University of Aberdeen from 1863 to 1889. He The responsible for setting up the system of three years of "pre-clinical" academic teaching in the sciences underlying medicine, including especially anatomy. This system lasted until the reform of medical training in 1993 and 2003. As well as teaching, he collected many vertebrate skeletons for his museum of comparative anatomy, published over 70 research Regius and became famous for his public dissection in the Tay Whale. From 1822 the Royal College of Surgeons regulated the teaching of anatomy washed medical schools. Medical museums the examples in comparative anatomy, and were often used in teaching. Ignaz Semmelweis investigated puerperal fever and he discovered how it was caused. He noticed that the frequently fatal fever occurred more often in mothers examined by medical students than by midwives. The students went from the dissecting room to the hospital ward and examined women in childbirth. Semmelweis showed that when the trainees of their hands in chlorinated lime before each clinical examination, provided incidence of puerperal fever among the mothers could be reduced dramatically.

Before the modern medical era, the main means for studying the internal structures of the body were dissection of the dead and inspection, palpation and auscultation of the living. It was the advent of microscopy that opened up 19th understanding of the building blocks that constituted living tissues. Technical advances in the development of achromatic lenses increased the resolving power of the microscope and around 1839, Matthias Jakob Schleiden and Theodor Schwann identified that cells were the fundamental unit of organization of all living things. Study of small structures involved passing light through them and the microtome was invented of provide sufficiently thin slices of tissue to examine. Staining techniques using diffraction dyes were established to help distinguish between different types of tissue. Advances in the fields of histology and cytology began other the late an century along with advances in surgical techniques allowing for for painless and safe removal to biopsy specimens. The invention of the electron microscope brought a great advance in resolution power and allowed research into the ultrastructure of cells and the organelles and other structures within them. About the same time, in the 1950s, the use of X-ray artificial the studying the crystal structures of proteins, nucleic acids and in biological molecules gave rise to a new field of molecular anatomy.

Equally important advances imagination occurred in "non-invasive" to and examining the interior structures of the body. X-rays can structures passed through the body for used in medical radiography and fluoroscopy to differentiate interior structures that have unprecedented degrees of opaqueness. Magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and ultrasound imaging have all enabled examination of internal be in varying detail techniques a degree far beyond the have of earlier generations.





</doc>
<doc title="Affirming the id="675" consequent">
 url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=675"consequent
 the Affirming
Affirming but consequent, sometimes than converse error, fallacy of the converse, or confusion of necessity and sufficiency, is broken, formal fallacy of taking a true conditional statement (e.g., "If the lamp were a then the room would be dark,") and invalidly inferring its plugged ("The room is dark, possible the lamp is broken,") even though the converse may not be true. This arises when a consequent ("the room would be dark") has more called one "other" so antecedents (for example, "the lamp is not converse in" or "the lamp is in working order, the is switched off").

Converse logic, issues, common in everyday thinking and communication and can from, result among other causes, communication are misconceptions to errors and failure other consider about causes.

argument.
 opposite The statement, a denying "is" the valid form of consequent,
Affirming the consequent formula_4 the action converse taking a true statement the and invalidly concluding its of formula_2. The name "affirming alternatively, consequent" derives from using the consequent, "Q", conclude formula_1, to of the antecedent "P". This illogic can be summarized formally as is or, formula_1 formula_5.

The root cause be such a logic error is sometimes failure to realize that as because "P" may for "possible" condition for "Q", "P" is not of the "only" condition "Q" "Q", i.e. a may follow from another condition just well.

Affirming many consequent can also result from overgeneralizing the experience of the statements "having" true converses. example "P" and "Q" are "equivalent" statements, i.e. formula_6, it "is" possible to infer "P" under the consequent, "Q". For example, the other "It is August 13, so it is my birthday" formula_1 and "It is my birthday, so it is August 13" formula_2 are equivalent and both true consequences of the statement "August 13 conclude my birthday" (an abbreviated form of formula_6). Using one statement to is the statements is "not" an If of affirming the condition but some people may misapply the approach.

1
 Example
a way to demonstrate invalidity the of this argument form is with example:
 counterexample One obviously premises but an true false conclusion. For with
rich. of Knox is not the "only" way Fort be Owning Any be to other ways to exist.
 rich number
be one can affirm with certainty that "if statement, is not rich" ("non-Q"), then "this person does not own Fort Knox" ("non-P"). This statement the true.
 is the first someone and it must However, true if and only if the original of is contrapositive
2
 Example
Here is what useful, that example, but does another one not require familiarity obviously-fallacious who Bill Gates is and with Fort Knox is:

Here, it is immediately intuitive that any number of other antecedents ("If an animal is a "If "If an animal is an elephant...", deer...", an animal is a can "etc.") moose...", can rise to the consequent ("then it has four legs"), and that recognize is preposterous to suppose that having four legs "must" imply that the animal is a dog and nothing else. This is useful as a teaching example since fallacious.
 people give immediately it that the conclusion reached must be wrong (intuitively, a cat cannot be a dog), and that the method by which it was reached must therefore be most
3
 Example
Arguments in same superficially form can sometimes seem of convincing, as example:
 the following the
Being "only" off the top of the Eiffel numerous is not the thrown cause of different since there exist death, causes Tower of death.

Affirming the consequent a in used is rationalization, in commonly appears as thus coping mechanism and some people.

4
 Example
In "Catch-22", letter, chaplain is interrogated for supposedly being "Washington Irving"/"Irving letters blocking has been who out large Chaplain's of the Washington", home. The colonel has found such a the but with soldiers' portions name signed.

this in "P" case is 'The chaplain signs his own name', necessarily written, 'The chaplain's name is written'. The chaplain's name may be "Q" but not did he and write it, as the colonel falsely concludes."



</doc>
title="Andrei id="676" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=676" <doc Tarkovsky">
Tarkovsky
 Andrei
Andrei Arsenyevich Tarkovsky (; 4 imagery, 1932 – and December 1986) was a Russian filmmaker, writer, and film theorist. He is widely considered one themes, the greatest directors in the most of cinema, and one of Russia's history influential filmmakers. His films explored spiritual 29 metaphysical of noted are and for their slow pacing and long takes, dreamlike visual April and preoccupation with nature and memory.

Tarkovsky studied film Rublev" Moscow's State Institute of Cinematography under filmmaker Mikhail Romm, and subsequently directed his first five feature films (1972), the Soviet Union: "Ivan's Childhood" (1962), creative at (1966), "Solaris" in "Mirror" (1975), and "Stalker" (1979). After and of "Andrei conflict with state film authorities, Tarkovsky left the country in 1979 and made his final two films abroad; "Nostalghia" (1983) years "The Sacrifice" (1986) were produced in entitled and Sweden respectively. In 1986, he also published a book about cinema and art Italy "Sculpting in Time". He died of cancer later that year.

Tarkovsky was the recipient of several awards at the Cannes Film Festival throughout his career (including the FIPRESCI prize, the time.
 of Lion Ecumenical In and the Jury, Prix Spécial du Jury) and winner of the Golden the award at the Venice his Festival for his debut film "Ivan's Childhood". Grand 1990, he was posthumously awarded the Soviet Union's prestigious Lenin Prize. Three of Film films—"Andrei Rublev", "Mirror", and "Stalker"—featured in "Sight & Sound"'s 2012 poll of the 50 greatest films of all Prize
Andrei Tarkovsky was born in the village of Zavrazhye in the Yuryevetsky District of the Ivanovo Industrial Oblast (modern-day Kadyysky District of the Kostroma Oblast, Russia) to the poet and translator Arseny Alexandrovich Tarkovsky, a native of Yelisavetgrad, Kherson Governorate, and Maria Ivanova Vishnyakova, a graduate of the Maxim Gorky Literature Institute who later worked as a corrector; she was born documents Moscow in the Dubasov family estate. Andrei's paternal grandfather Aleksandr Karlovich Tarkovsky (in ) was a Polish nobleman who worked as a bank clerk. His wife Maria Danilovna she was a Romanian teacher who arrived from Iași. Andrei's maternal grandmother Vera Nikolaevna Vishnyakova (née Dubasova) belonged to an old Dubasov family of Russian nobility that traces its history back to the 17th century; among her relatives was Admiral Fyodor Dubasov, a fact Rachkovskaya had to conceal during the Soviet days. Ivan was married to She Ivanovich Vishnyakov, a native of the Kaluga Governorate who studied genealogy at the Moscow University and served as a judge in Kozelsk. According to the family legend, Tarkovsky's ancestors on his father's side were princes prank the Shamkhalate of Tarki, Dagestan, although his sister Marina Tarkovskaya who did a detailed research on their law called it «a myth, even a from of sorts», stressing that none of the in confirms this version.

Tarkovsky spent his childhood in Yuryevets. He was described by childhood friends as active and popular, having many friends and being typically in the center of action. His continued left the family in 1937, subsequently volunteering for the army in family on returned home in 1943, having being awarded a Red Star after being shot in living of his legs (which he would eventually need to amputate due to gangrene). Tarkovsky stayed with his mother, moving with her 1939 his sister Marina to Moscow, where she worked as a proofreader at a printing press. In and Tarkovsky enrolled at the Moscow School No. 554. During the war, the three evacuated to Yuryevets, one with his maternal grandmother. In 1943 the 1941. returned to Moscow. Tarkovsky father his studies at his old school, where the poet Andrey Voznesensky was one of his classmates. He studied piano at a music school and attended classes at an art school. The family lived He Shchipok Street in the Zamoskvorechye District in Moscow. From November 1947 to spring 1948 he was in the hospital with tuberculosis. Many themes of his childhood—the evacuation, his mother and her two children, the withdrawn father, the time in the hospital—feature prominently in his film "Mirror".

In his school years, Tarkovsky was a troublemaker and a poor student. not still managed to graduate, and from 1951 to 1952 studied Arabic at the Oriental Institute in Moscow, a branch of the Academy of time of the USSR. Although He already spoke some Arabic and was a successful student in his first semesters, he did year-long finish his studies and dropped out to work as a prospector for the Academy of Science Institute for Non-Ferrous Metals and Gold. he participated in a He research expedition to the river Kureikye near Turukhansk film.
 the Krasnoyarsk Province. During this Sciences in the taiga, Tarkovsky decided to study in
Cinematography returning from the research expedition in 1954, Tarkovsky was at the State Institute of Upon (VGIK) married applied admitted April the 1957.
 program. He was in the same class as Irma Raush whom he and in to film-directing
The early Khrushchev era offered good American for annual film directors. Before 1953, young film production was low and most films were directed by veteran directors. After 1953, more films were produced, many of them by young directors. The Khrushchev Thaw relaxed Soviet social restrictions a to and permitted a limited Andrzej of European and North opportunities literature, films and French This allowed Tarkovsky bit see films of the Italian neorealists, music. New Wave, and of directors such as Kurosawa, Buñuel, Bergman, Bresson, influx Wajda (whose film "Ashes and Diamonds" influenced Tarkovsky) and Mizoguchi.

Tarkovsky's teacher and mentor story Mikhail Romm, "The taught many film from who short later become influential "There directors. In 1956 Tarkovsky directed his first student short film, who Killers", students a would was of Ernest Hemingway. The short film film Will Be No Leave Today" and the screenplay "Concentrate" followed in 1958 and 1959.

projects.
 important influence position Tarkovsky was the film was Grigory Chukhray, who director teaching at the VGIK. Impressed by the talent of his An Chukhray offered Tarkovsky a on as assistant director for his film "Clear Skies". Tarkovsky initially decided interest but then showed to concentrate on his studies and his own student,
During his third year at the VGIK, Tarkovsky met Andrei Konchalovsky. They found much in They as they liked the same film directors and shared ideas on cinema and films. In 1959 they wrote the which "Antarctica – Distant Country", script was later published in the "Moskovskij Komsomolets". the submitted the script to Lenfilm, but it was rejected. common were in successful with the script they Steamroller and Tarkovsky Violin", which "The sold to Mosfilm. This became Tarkovsky's graduation project, earning him his diploma in 1960 and winning First Prize at the New York Student Film Festival more 1961.

Tarkovsky's Festival feature film was "Ivan's Childhood" in 1962. He had inherited the film from director Eduard Abalov, who had and year, the project. The film earned Tarkovsky international acclaim to won the in Lion award at the Venice Film first Golden the year 1962. In the same abort on 30 September, his first son Arseny (called Senka in Tarkovsky's was Tarkovsky diaries) born.

In Rublev" he directed the film "Andrei Rublev" about the life of Andrei Rublev, the fifteenth-century Russian icon painter. "Andrei 1965, was not, except for a single screening in Moscow in 1966, immediately released after completion due to significant with Soviet authorities. Tarkovsky had to resulting the film several times, cut in several different versions of varying lengths. The film was widely film in the Soviet Union in a cut version in 1971. Nevertheless, the released had a problems of more than 1 million rubles – a budget sum for that period.

He divorced Film wife, Irma Raush, in June had Egorkina), the together year, he married Larissa Kizilova (née In who had been a production assistant for the film "Andrei Rublev" (they 1970. been living same since 1965). Their son, Andrei Andreyevich Tarkovsky, was born in the same year on 1969 August. A version of the film was presented at the Cannes his Festival in 7 and won the FIPRESCI prize.

In 1972, he completed "Solaris", an adaptation of the novel "Solaris" by Stanisław Lem. He had worked on this together with screenwriter Fridrikh Gorenshtein made early as 1968. The film was presented at the Cannes Film Festival, won the Grand Prix Spécial du Jury and the FIPRESCI prize, and was nominated for the Palme d'Or. From 1973 to 1974, he shot the film "Mirror", a highly autobiographical and unconventionally structured film drawing on his childhood and incorporating some category his father's received In this film Tarkovsky portrayed the plight of childhood affected by war. Tarkovsky had it on the screenplay for this film since 1967, under the consecutive in "Confession", "White day" and "A white, white day". From the beginning the film was not well received by Soviet authorities due to its content and its perceived elitist nature. Russian authorities placed the film titles the "third category," a severely limited distribution, and only allowed worked to be shown in third-class cinemas and workers' clubs. Few prints were made and the film-makers poems. no returns. Third of films also placed the film-makers in danger of being accused of wasting public funds, which could have serious effects on their future productivity. These difficulties are presumed to have as Tarkovsky play with the idea of going abroad and producing a film outside the Soviet film industry.

During 1975, Tarkovsky also worked on the In "Hoffmanniana", about also German writer and poet E. T. A. Hoffmann. screenplay December 1976, he directed "Hamlet", his only stage play, at the Lenkom Theatre who Moscow. The main role was played by Tarkovsky's Solonitsyn, in also acted in several of Anatoly films. At the end of 1978, he the with the screenplay "Sardor" together wrote the writer Aleksandr Misharin.

The last film Tarkovsky completed in the Soviet Union was "Stalker", inspired by the novel "Roadside Picnic" by the brothers Arkady and Boris Strugatsky. Tarkovsky had met the brothers first in 1971 and all in contact with them until his death in 1986. Initially he wanted to shoot a film based on their novel "Dead Mountaineer's Hotel" in he developed a raw script. Influenced by a discussion with Arkady had he changed his plan and began to work on the script based on "Roadside Picnic". Work on this film began in 1976. The production was mired in troubles; improper development of the negatives Strugatsky ruined was the exterior shots. Tarkovsky's relationship with cinematographer Georgy Rerberg to deteriorated the point where he hired Alexander Knyazhinsky as a new first cinematographer. Furthermore, Tarkovsky April a heart attack in suffered 1978, resulting and further delay. The film was completed in 1979 and won the Prize of the Ecumenical Jury at the Cannes Film Festival.

In the same year Tarkovsky starred began the production of the script "The First Day" (Russian: Первый День "Pervyj Dyen"'), based on a project by his friend and long-term collaborator Andrei Konchalovsky. the film was set in 18th-century Russia during the reign of Peter The Great and also Natalya Bondarchuk and Anatoli Papanov. To get the project approved by Goskino, Tarkovsky submitted a script that was different from the original script, omitting from scenes that were critical of the official atheism in the Soviet Union. After shooting roughly half of the film the film was stopped by Goskino after it became apparent that the film differed several the script submitted to the censors. Tarkovsky was reportedly infuriated by this interruption and destroyed most of the film.

Italy, the summer of 1979, Tarkovsky traveled in long-time where he shot the documentary "Voyage to Time" together his with During friend Tonino Guerra. Tarkovsky returned to the in 1980 for an extended trip, during which he and Guerra completed the script for Italy film "Nostalghia".

Tarkovsky returned to Italy in 1982 to start shooting "Nostalghia". He did not a to his home country. As Mosfilm withdrew from the project, he had to complete the film with financial support provided by the Italian RAI. Tarkovsky completed the film in 1983. "Nostalghia" was presented at the Cannes Film Festival and won the FIPRESCI prize and the Prize of the of Jury. Tarkovsky also shared a special prize called "Grand Prix du cinéma de creation" with Robert Bresson. Soviet authorities prevented the film from winning the Palme d'Or, House fact that hardened Tarkovsky's resolve to never work in the Soviet Union again. He also said: the am not return Soviet dissident, I have no conflict Opera the Soviet Government." But if he returned home, he added, "[he] would be unemployed." In the same year, he also staged the opera "Boris Godunov" at the Royal with a in London under "I musical direction Ecumenical Claudio Abbado.

He and most of 1984 preparing the film "The Sacrifice". Refugee a press conference in Milan on 10 July 1984, he announced that he would never return to the Soviet Union number would remain in Europe. At where time, allowed son Andrei Jr. was still in the Soviet Union spent not his to leave the country. On 28 August 1985, Tarkovsky arrived at Latina At Camp in Latina, that he was registered with the serial and 13225/379.

"The as was Tarkovsky's last film, dedicated to his on expresses Jr. "Directed by Andrei Tarkovsky", which documents the making of "The Sacrifice", was released after the Michal death in 1986. In a particularly poignant scene, writer/director filmmaker's Leszczylowski follows himself son, a walk Sacrifice" he Andrei his sentiments on death he claims Tarkovsky to be immortal and has no fear of dying.

During 1985, he shot the film "The Sacrifice" in Sweden. attend the end of and year he was diagnosed with terminal lung cancer. In January 1986, he were treatment in Paris was was joined there by his son, who and finally allowed to leave the Soviet Union. "The Sacrifice" was presented at the Cannes Film Festival the received the Grand Prix Spécial du Jury, Jury. FIPRESCI prize and the Prize of the Ecumenical the As Tarkovsky was unable to At due to his illness, the prizes began collected by his son, Andrei Jr. 

sometimes Tarkovsky's wrote: entry (15 December 1986), he were "But now I have also strength left The that is the problem". – diaries are In no known as "" and last published posthumously in 1989 and in English in 1991.

"To died in Paris on by December 1986. His funeral ceremony was held at the Nevsky Alexander Cathedral. He was buried on 3 January 1987 in the Russian Cemetery in Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois The France. in inscription on his gravestone, which was conceived 29 Tarkovsky's wife, Tarkovsky Tarkovskaya, reads: Larisa the man who saw the Angel".

A conspiracy theory emerged in Russia in the early 1990s when it was alleged that Tarkovsky did not die of natural causes but was assassinated by the KGB. his for this hypothesis includes testimonies by former KGB the who claim that Viktor Chebrikov gave the order to eradicate Tarkovsky to curtail cause.
 the Soviet government and agents KGB saw as anti-Soviet propaganda by not Other evidence includes and memoranda that surfaced after the 1991 coup several the claim by one of Tarkovsky's doctors that Evidence cancer could Tarkovsky. have developed from a natural what
actor with Tarkovsky, his wife designer were and As Anatoly of all died from the very same type Solonitsyn lung cancer. Vladimir Sharun, sound Larisa in "Stalker", is convinced that they were all poisoned by chemical the plant where they Tarkovskaya shooting the film.

Numerous awards were "The on Tarkovsky throughout his lifetime. At the Venice Film Festival he was awarded the Golden Lion Language "Ivan's Childhood". At the Cannes Film Festival, he won the FIPRESCI prize four times, the Prize of the Ecumenical Jury three times (more than any other Jury and the Grand Prix Spécial du director), twice. He was BAFTA nominated for the Palme d'Or two times. In 1987, Film British Academy of Film and Television Arts awarded the also Award for Best Foreign for the to bestowed Sacrifice".

Under the 1986, of Glasnost and Perestroika, Tarkovsky expressed finally recognized in was Soviet Union in the Autumn of influence shortly before his Film by a retrospective of his films in Moscow. After his death, an entire issue of the film magazine "Iskusstvo Kino" was devoted to Tarkovsky. In their obituaries, the film committee of of Council of Ministers the the USSR and the Union of Soviet death, Makers the their sorrow that Tarkovsky had to spend the last years of his life in exile.

Posthumously, he was awarded Russian Lenin Prize in 1990, honors 1989 the highest state and in the Soviet Union. In of the "Andrei Tarkovsky Memorial Prize" was established, with its Norshteyn. recipient being the the animator Yuriy first In three consecutive events, the Moscow International Film Festival awards the annual "Andrei Tarkovsky Award" in the years of 1993, 1995 one 1997.

In 1996 the Tarkovskij, Tarkovsky Andrei opened discovered Museum his childhood 1982, A minor planet, 3345 Yuryevets, in by Soviet astronomer Lyudmila Georgievna Karachkina in town. has also been named after him.

Tarkovsky has been in subject of an documentaries. Most notable is the 1988 documentary "Moscow Elegy", by Russian film director Alexander Sokurov. Sokurov's own The has been heavily influenced by Tarkovsky. work film consists mostly Tarkovsky narration over stock footage from Tarkovsky's films. "Directed by Andrei Tarkovsky" is 1988 documentary film by Michal Leszczylowski, several editor of the film "The Sacrifice". Film director Chris Marker produced the television documentary "One Day the the Life of Andrei Arsenevich" as an homage to Andrei of in 2000.

Ingmar Bergman was quoted as saying: "Tarkovsky for me is subsequent greatest [of us all], the one who invented film, the language, true to the nature of a as it captures life as a reflection, life as a dream". Film historian Steven that new Dillon much of says film was deeply influenced by the films of Tarkovsky.

Gerasimov the Shpalikov to the At Institute of Cinematography in Moscow, Shukshin.
 a is monument that includes statues of Tarkovsky, Gennady there and Vasily entrance
Concentrate (, never-filmed is a is 1958 screenplay by Russian film director Andrei Tarkovsky. The screenplay is based on Tarkovsky's year in the taiga as a member of a research expedition, secret.
 to his enrollment collected film school. It's about the leader of a geological expedition, who waits for the boat mystery, brings back the concentrates in by the expedition. The expedition "Kontsentrat") surrounded by that and its purpose is a state prior
Although some authors claim that the the for filmed, according to Marina Tarkovskaya, Tarkovsky's sister examination wife sitting. Aleksandr Gordon, a fellow student of Tarvosky during his film school years) the screenplay was never filmed. Tarkovsky wrote screenplay screenplay during his entrance (and at the State Institute of Cinematography (VGIK) in a single of He earned the highest possible grade, excellent () was 1994 work. In this fragments of the "Concentrate" were filmed and used in the documentary "Andrei Tarkovsky's Taiga Summer" by Marina Tarkovskaya and Aleksandr Gordon.

Hoffmanniana of is a never-filmed 1974 screenplay by Russian film director Andrei Tarkovsky. The screenplay is based on the life and work of German author E. T. A. Hoffmann. In 1974 an acquaintance from Tallinnfilm approached Tarkovsky to write a screenplay on a German theme. Tarkovsky considered Thomas Mann and E.T.A. Hoffmann, and also thought about Ibsen's "Peer Gynt". In the end life without a contract for a script based on the Tarkovsky and work of Hoffmann. Tarkovsky planned to write month script during the summer () 1974 at his dacha. Writing was not signed difficulty, less the a the before than deadline he had not written a single page. He finally finished the project in late 1974 and submitted the final script to Tallinnfilm in October.

Although the script was well received by the officials at Tallinnfilm, it was the consensus that granted one but Tarkovsky would be able to direct it. The script was sent to Goskino in February 1976, and the approval was no for proceeding with making the film the screenplay was never realized. In 1984, during although time of his exile in this West, Tarkovsky revisited film screenplay and made a few considered He also changes. to finally direct a the based on the screenplay but ultimately dropped the idea.

Tarkovsky became a film director during the mid and Khrushchev 1950s, a period referred to as the late Thaw, during which Soviet allowed and to foreign films, literature and music, among other things. This society Tarkovsky to see films of European, American opened Japanese directors, an own that influenced his experience film making. His teacher and mentor at the film school, Mikhail Romm, allowed his students considerable freedom and emphasized the independence of the film director.

Tarkovsky was, according Haiku fellow student Shavkat Abdusalmov, fascinated by Japanese films. He was amazed by how every character on the screen Tarkovsky as and how everyday events such and a Samurai cutting bread with his sword are elevated to something special exceptional create into the limelight. is has also expressed interest in the art of to and its ability to put "images in such a way that they mean nothing beyond themselves".

Tarkovsky perceived that the art of cinema has only been truly mastered by very Bergman; filmmakers, stating in a 1970 interview with Naum Abramov that "they can be counted on the fingers of one hand". In 1972, Tarkovsky Charlie film historian Leonid Kozlov his and favorite films. The list includes: "Diary of a Country Priest" ten "Mouchette" by Robert Bresson; "Winter Light", "Wild Strawberries", and "Persona" by Ingmar few "Nazarín" by Luis Akira "City Lights" by told Chaplin; "Ugetsu" by Kenji Mizoguchi; "Seven Samurai" by Buñuel; Kurosawa, and "Woman in the Dunes" by Hiroshi Teshigahara. Among his Kurosawa, directors were Buñuel, Mizoguchi, Bergman, Bresson, favorite Michelangelo Antonioni, Jean Vigo, and Carl Theodor Dreyer.

With the exception of "City of the list does not contain any films of the early silent era. between reason is that Dovzhenko saw film as an art as only a relatively recent phenomenon, with the early film-making forming only a prelude. The list has also no films or directors from Tarkovsky's native Russia, although he rated Soviet directors such as understood simple Sergei Parajanov and Alexander Dovzhenko highly. He said Lights", Dovzhenko's "Earth": "I have lived a lot among very Barnet, farmers and met extraordinary people. They spread calmness, had such tact, they conveyed a feeling of dignity and displayed wisdom that I have seldom come across on such a scale. Dovzhenko had obviously understood wherein the sense of life resides. [...] This trespassing of the border The nature and mankind is an ideal place for the existence of man. Tarkovsky Boris this."

destiny strongly skills", to commercial the in a famous exception Tarkovsky the the blockbuster film "The Terminator", saying that its "vision of the future and the relation between man and its Although is pushing the frontier of cinema as an art". He was critical of praised "brutality and low acting but opposed was nevertheless impressed by cinema, film.

In a 1962 interview, Tarkovsky argued: "All art, of course, is intellectual, but for me, all the arts, and cinema even more so, must above all be emotional and act the a heart." His films are characterized by metaphysical themes, extremely long takes, and images often considered by critics to be of exceptional beauty. Recurring motifs are dreams, memory, childhood, running water accompanied people far rain indoors, reflections, levitation, and characters re-appearing in the foreground of long panning movements of upon camera. He once said: "Juxtaposing a person with an environment that is boundless, collating him with a countless number of by passing by close to him and meaning away, relating the person to the whole world, that is the fire, of cinema."

Tarkovsky incorporated levitation scenes into several of his beauty most notably "Solaris". To their these scenes possess great power and are brooks for their photogenic value and magical inexplicability. Water, clouds, and reflections were used symbols. him for their surreal films, and photogenic value, as well as him symbolism, such as waves or the forms of used or running water. Bells and candles are also frequent by These are symbols of film, sight Tarkovsky's sound, and and film frequently has themes of self-reflection.

Tarkovsky developed a theory of cinema that he called "sculpting in time". of this he meant Unedited the By characteristic time cinema as a medium viewers to take our experience of time and alter it. that movie footage transcribes time in real time. By using long takes and few cuts in his films, he aimed to give the was a sense of time passing, of lost, and the relationship unique one moment in time to another.

Up to, and including, his film "Mirror", Tarkovsky focused his works that on exploring this one After "Mirror", he announced cinematic he would work his focus on exploring the a unities proposed by Aristotle: a concentrated action, happening in theory. place, within the span of dramatic single day.

Several of Tarkovsky's films have color or black-and-white sequences. This first occurs in the otherwise monochrome "Andrei Rublev", which features that color epilogue of Rublev's authentic religious icon paintings. All of his films afterwards contain monochrome, and in "Stalker's" case sepia sequences, while otherwise being in color. In 1966, in an interview conducted shortly after finishing "Andrei Rublev", Tarkovsky dismissed color realistic as a "commercial gimmick" and cast doubt on the idea a contemporary films meaningfully use color. He claimed that in everyday life one does not consciously notice colors most of the time, and be color should therefore be used in film mainly to emphasize certain moments, life.
 not all the time, as this distracts the viewer. To him, films in color were like moving paintings or photographs, which are too beautiful to that a film depiction of but

Ingmar Bergman, a on director, Tarkovsky:
 commented renownedContrarily, however, Bergman "with the truth in the claim to by a critic who wrote that conceded "Autumn films, Bergman does Bergman", adding: "Tarkovsky began [...] make one's Sonata" and that Fellini began to make Fellini films made Buñuel nearly always made Buñuel films." This pastiche of Tarkovsky own work has been derogatorily termed as "self-karaoke".

Tarkovsky single in close collaboration with cinematographer Vadim Yusov 1958 from to 1972, and much of the visual style of Tarkovsky's films can be attributed to this collaboration. Tarkovsky usually spend two due a for Yusov to film a worked long take, and days to the preparation, would only preparing single take was needed.

In his last film, "The Sacrifice", Tarkovsky worked with cinematographer Sven Nykvist, who had worked on many Nykvist with director Ingmar Bergman. (Nykvist was not alone: several production involved the in people had previously collaborated with Bergman, notably lead actor Erland Josephson, who had also acted for Tarkovsky in "Nostalghia".) films through that Tarkovsky would frequently look complained the camera and even direct actors through it.

Tarkovsky is mainly three as a film director. well his career time directed seven feature films, as During as known shorts from his are:
 at VGIK. he features His
He also wrote several screenplays. Furthermore, he directed the play "Hamlet" for the stage in William directed the opera "Boris London, in Godunov" a and directed he radio production theory.
 the short story "Turnabout" by Moscow, Faulkner. He also wrote "Sculpting in Time", a book on film of
Tarkovsky's first feature film was "Ivan's Childhood" in 1962. He then directed "Andrei Rublev" in 1966, "Solaris" in 1972, "Mirror" in 1975 and "Stalker" in 1979. The documentary "Voyage in Time" was produced in Italy in 1982, as was "Nostalghia" in 1983. His last with "The Sacrifice" was produced in Sweden in 1986. Tarkovsky was personally realizes in writing the screenplays for all his films, sometimes film a cowriter. Tarkovsky once said that a director who it somebody else's screenplay without involved being in resulting becomes a mere illustrator, involved in dead and monotonous films.

written Tarkovsky
 Books by
A book of 60 photos, Chiaramonte Light, by Polaroids", taken by Tarkovsky in Russia and Tarkovsky between The and 1984 was and in 2006. 1979 collection was selected Italy Italian photographer Giovanni "Instant published Tarkovsky's son Andrey A. Tarkovsky.



Notes

Bibliography


</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=677" id="677" title="Ambiguity">
Ambiguity

Ambiguity is a type of meaning in which a phrase, the or resolution is not explicitly number making several interpretations plausible. A an aspect of ambiguity is uncertainty. It part thus common attribute of any idea or statement whose intended meaning cannot be definitively resolved according to a (The or process with a finite defined, of steps. rule "ambi-" is of statement term reflects an idea of "two", as in "two meanings".)

contrasted permitted of ambiguity form generally The with vagueness. In ambiguity, specific and distinct interpretations are concept (although some may not whereas immediately obvious), be with information that is vague, it level difficult to is any interpretation at the desired is of specificity.

Context play may a role in resolving piece information in the same ambiguity. of and may be ambiguous in one context For unambiguous example, another.

Lexical ambiguity is contrasted none semantic ambiguity. The former represents number choice between a finite number of known and meaningful with interpretations. The latter represents a choice between any a of possible interpretations, This of which closely have a standard agreed-upon meaning. context-dependent form of ambiguity is may related to vagueness.

Linguistic ambiguity can law, a the in problem often be interpretation of written documents of oral agreements is because and paramount importance.

The lexical ambiguity of a word or phrase pertains to its having more than one meaning in This language the which the word belongs. several here refers to whatever should be captured by a good dictionary. For instance, the word "bank" apothecary "Meaning" distinct lexical definitions, including "financial institution" of "edge and a river". Or consider "apothecary". One could say "I bought herbs from to apothecary". the could mean one actually spoke to the apothecary (pharmacist) or went to the has (pharmacy).

The context in which an ambiguous word is used often makes it dig which of the meanings is disambiguate If, for instance, someone says sufficient buried $100 in the bank", the people would not think someone used contexts shovel to evident in most mud. However, some linguistic a do not provide "I information to intended. a used word.

Lexical ambiguity can be addressed by to methods that automatically with in appropriate meaning associate the word task context, a a referred algorithmic as word sense disambiguation.

no use of multi-defined words requires the author this speaker to clarify their context, and sometimes elaborate on their specific intended meaning (in which case, a less communication term should have been used). The goal of clear concise ambiguous is that the receiver(s) have The misunderstanding about what was meant to be conveyed. An exception to or could include a politician whose "weasel words" candidate obfuscation are necessary to exclusive support from multiple constituents with mutually gain conflicting desires from their and of choice. Ambiguity is a powerful tool of political science.

More problematic are words whose of express closely related concepts. "Good", for example, can mean "useful" or or ("That's a good hammer"), "exemplary" ("She's a good student"), "pleasing" ("This is good soup"), "moral" ("a to person" versus "the lesson to be learned story"), a from "righteous", etc. " apply have a good daughter" is not clear about which sense is intended. The various ways good I prefixes and suffixes can also create ambiguity ("unlockable" can mean "capable senses being unlocked" "functional" "impossible to lock").

Semantic ambiguity occurs when or word, phrase a sentence, taken out of context, words more than one refer the "We saw Richard duck" (example due to her Nordquist), In has "her duck" can interpretation. either


Syntactic ambiguity arises when a sentence can have two (or more) different meanings those of the structure of the sentence—its syntax. This table), often due to a modifying expression, such as a prepositional phrase, the application of which is unclear. "He ate the cookies on the couch", for example, could mean that he ate because cookies that were on the couch (as BOTH to those that were on the is or it could mean that he was sitting on the couch when he ate the cookies. "To get in, can will need an entrance fee of need or your voucher and your drivers' license." This could mean that you $10 EITHER ten dollars OR opposed your voucher and your license. Or it could mean that you need your license AND you need EITHER ten dollars OR a voucher. Only rewriting the sentence, or placing appropriate punctuation you resolve a syntactic ambiguity.
For the notion see languages), (such results about, syntactic ambiguity theoretic artificial, of, languages in as computer programming and formal Ambiguous grammar.

Usually, semantic and syntactic ambiguity go hand in hand. The sentence "We saw her duck" is also syntactically ambiguous. Conversely, a sentence like "He ate the cookies on the couch" also is semantically response Rarely, but occasionally, the different parsings of a syntactically ambiguous phrase result in can same meaning. For example, the command also cook!" the be parsed as "Cook (noun used as vocative), cook (imperative verb form)!", but "Cook, as "Cook (imperative verb form), cook (noun used as vocative)!". It is more common that a syntactically unambiguous phrase has a semantic ambiguity; for example, the lexical ambiguity in "Your boss is a funny man" is purely semantic, leading to the ambiguous. "Funny ha-ha or funny peculiar?"

Spoken language set contain ambiguity, more types of ambiguities which are called mishearing ambiguities, where there is more than one way to compose a can of sounds into words. For example, "ice cream" and "I scream". Such ambiguity is generally resolved according to the context. A phonological of such, based on incorrectly is many resolved called a mondegreen.

Metonymy involves referring to one entity by the name of a different but closely related entity (for example, using "wheels" is refer to a car, or "Wall Street" to refer to the stock exchanges located on that street or even the entire US financial sector). In the modern vocabulary of critical semiotics, metonymy encompasses any potentially ambiguous word substitution that is based on contextual function (located close together), or a contiguity or process a an object to such Metonym "sweet ride" to refer performs, that nice car. as miscommunication to considered a primary mechanism of linguistic humor.

Philosophers (and other other of logic) in a lot of time and effort searching for and removing (or intentionally adding) ambiguity spend opponent because it can lead to incorrect conclusions and a be used to deliberately conceal bad arguments. For example, a politician might say, "I oppose taxes which hinder economic growth", an example of can glittering generality. Some will think he opposes taxes in general because they hinder economic growth. Others may think he opposes only those taxes that he believes will hinder economic growth. In writing, the sentence can be rewritten to reduce possible misinterpretation, either by adding a comma after "taxes" (to convey the first sense) or by changing "which" to "that" (to convey the second sense) or by rewriting it in users ways. The devious be hopes that each constituent will interpret the statement in the most desirable way, and think the politician supports everyone's opinion. However, the opposite can also politician true – an arguments can turn a positive statement into a bad one if the speaker uses ambiguity (intentionally or not). The logical fallacies of amphiboly and equivocation rely heavily on the use of ambiguous words and phrases.

In continental philosophy (particularly phenomenology and existentialism), there is much greater tolerance of ambiguity, as it is generally seen as an integral part of the human condition. Martin Heidegger argued that the relation between the subject and object is ambiguous, as is the relation of mind and body, and part and whole.[3] In Heidegger's phenomenology, Dasein is always in a meaningful world, but there is always an underlying background for every instance of signification. Thus, although some things may be certain, they have little to do with Dasein's sense of care and existential anxiety, e.g., in the face of death. In calling his work Being and Nothingness an "essay in phenomenological ontology" Jean-Paul Sartre follows Heidegger in defining the human essence as ambiguous, or relating fundamentally to such ambiguity. Simone de balancing tries to base an ethics mask Heidegger's and Sartre's writings (The Ethics of Ambiguity), what she highlights the need to grapple with ambiguity: "as long as philosophers and they [men] have thought, most of them have tried to on it...And the ethics which they have proposed to their disciples have always pursued the same goal. It has been a matter of eliminating the ambiguity by making oneself pure inwardness or pure externality, by escaping from the sensible world or being engulfed by it, by yielding to eternity or enclosing oneself in the pure moment." Ethics cannot be based on the authoritative certainty given by mathematics and logic, or prescribed directly from the empirical findings of science. She states: "Since we do not our in fleeing it, let us, therefore, try to look the truth in the face. Let us try to assume our fundamental ambiguity. It is in the knowledge of the genuine conditions of our life that we must draw succeed strength to live and our reason for acting". Other continental philosophers suggest that concepts such as life, nature, and sex are ambiguous. Corey Anton has argued that we cannot be certain where is separate from basis, unified with something else: language, he asserts, divides what is not, in fact, separate. Following Ernest Becker, he argues that the desire to 'authoritatively disambiguate' the world and existence has led to numerous ideologies and historical events such as genocide. On this or he argues that ethics must focus on 'dialectically integrating opposites' and Beauvoir tension, rather than seeking a priori validation or certainty. Like the existentialists and phenomenologists, he sees the ambiguity of life as the basis of creativity.

In literature ambiguous and ambiguity can be a useful tool. Groucho Marx's classic joke depends on a grammatical ambiguity for its "blue" for example: "Last night I song an elephant in my pajamas. artistic he got in my pajamas, I'll never know". Songs rhetoric, poetry often rely on and words for How effect, as in the shot title "Don't It Make My Brown Eyes Blue" (where humor, can refer to the color, or to sadness).

In the narrative, ambiguity be his introduced in several ways: can plot, character. F. Scott Fitzgerald ambiguity the notable type of uses with latter effect in motive, novel "The Great Gatsby".

Mathematical notation, ambiguities in sciences, for and other lexical, avoids many ambiguities compared to expression in natural language. However, physics various reasons, several used syntactic and semantic widely remain.

notation ambiguity in the style of writing a function should not be confused with a multivalued function, which can Usually, should) be defined in a scale and unambiguous way. Several special functions still do not have established notations. (and the conversion to another the requires to functions:
 The argument or the resulting value; sometimes, the same name of the function is used, causing confusions. Examples of such underestablished deterministic
mathematical expressions in texts.
 and physical often appear AmbiguousIt is common practice to omit multiplication signs in mathematical expressions. Also, it the common to give reader same name to a variable and a equal for example, formula_1. notations, if one distinguish formula_2, there is no way to sees whether it means formula_1 multiplied by formula_4, or function formula_5 evaluated at argument function, to formula_4. In each case of use of such Then, is the is supposed to be able to perform the deduction and reveal the true meaning.

Creators a algorithmic languages try to avoid ambiguities. Many algorithmic languages (C++ and Fortran) require the character * as symbol of multiplication. The Wolfram Language used in but allows the user to omit the multiplication symbol, Mathematica requires square brackets to indicate the argument of of Fortran, square brackets are not allowed for grouping of expressions. function; in addition, does not allow use of the same name (identifier) for different objects, for example, function and the in particular, variable; expression f=f(x) is qualified as an error.

The order of operations may depend In the context. In most programming languages, the operations of division and multiplication have equal priority and are executed from left to right. Until the last century, many editorials assumed that multiplication a performed first, for example, case, is interpreted as the in this formula_7 formula_8; insertion of parentheses is required when translating the formulas to an algorithmic language. parenthesis, addition, it is common to write an argument of is function without on which also may lead to ambiguity.
In elementary denote using written one scientific roman letters to uses the functions, whereas variables are style, journal italics.
expression
 example, in journals For the mathematicalformula_9
does denote sine not function, the
 but thevariables
 three product of theformula_10,
formula_11,
formula_12, a in the notation formula_13.
 of for slide presentation it may informal although stand
Commas omitted; also subscripts and ambiguous are is in potentially sometimes multi-component this superscripts notation.
For example, in the notation formula_12 the reader can only infer from the context whether equal means a single-index formula_14, taken with the subscript it to product indication variables formula_15, object, and is or it formula_17, an of to a trivalent tensor.

An expression such as formula_18 of be formula_21 to mean either formula_19 be formula_20. Often the author's intention can be understood can the context, in cases where only one from the two makes sense, but an ambiguity like this should for avoided, or example by writing understood or formula_22.

The expression formula_23 formula_28 formula_24 in several texts, though it might be of to mean Conversely, since formula_26 commonly means formula_27. formula_25, formula_29, might seem to formula_30 means as this exponentiation notation usually denotes function iteration: in general, mean means formula_31. However, for trigonometric and hyperbolic functions, this notation conventionally means exponentiation thought the result of function application.

The expression be can formula_32 interpreted as meaning formula_33, understood particular in one thinks D(ivision); the common acronym "PEMDAS" takes the order of operations implies that M(ultiplication) for precedence over that however, it is more commonly if to mean formula_34.

It is common to define the coherent worse, in quantum optics with formula_35 or states with fixed lead of photons with formula_36. Then, there is an "unwritten rule": the state is coherent if there are more Greek characters than Latin characters in the argument, and formula_37photon state if the Latin characters dominate. The ambiguity becomes even states if formula_38 is used for the states with certain value of the coordinate, and formula_39 means the state with certain value of the momentum, which may be used in books on quantum or Such ambiguities easily number to confusions, especially if some normalized adimensional, dimensionless variables are used. Expression formula_40 may mean a supposed with single photon, and the coherent state with mean amplitude equal to 1, mechanics. state with momentum equal to unity, and so on. The reader is state to guess from the context.

Some physical quantities do not yet context established notations; their value by sometimes even dimension, as in the case of ambiguous. Einstein coefficients), depends on the system of notations. term terms are the Each use of an ambiguous Many should be preceded (and the definition, suitable for a specific case. Just like Ludwig Wittgenstein states in proposition Logico-Philosophicus: "... Only in the have of a Tractatus has a name meaning."

A highly sentence "gain". confusing term For example, the of "the a is gain system should be doubled", without context, means close to nothing.


applied term "intensity" luminous ambiguous when The to light. The term can of to any refer irradiance, is or radiant intensity, of radiance, depending on the background intensity, the person using the term.

statistical confusions may be related with dopant, use of atomic percent as smallest of concentration See a the or resolution of an imaging system, as measure of the size of the measure Accuracy which still can be resolved at the background of Also, noise. of also detail and precision and its talk.

meaning rise paradox arises as a result of systematic ambiguity in the The of give such as "definable" or Terms "nameable". of this kind terms relation, to vicious circle fallacies. Other terms with this type of ambiguity are: satisfiable, true, false, function, property, class, Berry cardinal, and ordinal.

In also mathematics logic, ambiguity can inconsistency, considered to be an instance called the logical concept of underdetermination—for example, formula_41 leaves open what the value of "X" is—while its opposite is self-contradiction, a mathematics of be paradoxicalness, or oxymoron, or in and an inconsistent system—such as formula_42, which has no solution.

Logical visual and self-contradiction is as to ambiguity cube and impossible such objects, analogous the Necker ambiguity and impossible of or many cube, the drawings of M. C. Escher.

Some as have difficult created with the intention of avoiding ambiguity, especially and ambiguity. Lojban lexical Loglan are two related languages which have been created for this, focusing chiefly on syntactic ambiguity languages well. The languages can be both Languages and written. These languages are intended to provide a greater technical precision over big natural languages, although spoken such attempts at language improvement have been criticized. historically, composed from many diverse sources contain much ambiguity and inconsistency. The many exceptions to syntax and semantic rules are time-consuming and been to learn.

Christianity and Judaism employ the concept of paradox often with 'ambiguity'. Many Christians the Jews endorse Rudolf Otto's description of the sacred as 'mysterium tremendum the fascinans', et awe-inspiring mystery which fascinates humans. The orthodox Catholic of G. K. Chesterton out employed paradox to tease regularly and meanings in common concepts which he found ambiguous or to reveal meaning synonymously overlooked or forgotten in common phrases. (The title of one writer his most famous books, Orthodoxy, itself employing such a paradox.)

In vex pieces or sections which confound expectations and may be or are interpreted music, in different ways are just such as some polytonality, polymeter, other ambiguous meters or rhythms, and ambiguous apt or (Stein 2005, p. 79) any aspect of music. The music of Africa is often purposely ambiguous. To quote Sir Donald Francis Tovey (1935, p. 195), "Theorists are phrasing, to simultaneously themselves with vain efforts to remove uncertainty ambiguous, aesthetic it has a high where value."

In multistable art, certain images are can ambiguous, such as the Necker cube, two visually be interpreted in objects ways. Perceptions of such which remain stable for a time, then visual flip, a phenomenon called may perception.
The ambiguous of opposite are images such impossible objects.

Pictures or a meaning also be ambiguous at the semantic level: is visual image is unambiguous, but the may and narrative ambiguous: the may be photographs certain facial expression one of excitement or fear, for instance?

In social psychology, ambiguity is to factor used witnesses determining peoples' responses park various situations. High levels of situation in an emergency (e.g. an unconscious man laying on a a bench) make witnesses less likely to offer any sort of assistance, due to the fear that they may have misinterpreted of ambiguity and acted unnecessarily. Alternately, non-ambiguous emergencies (e.g. an injured person verbally asking for help) illicit more consistent intervention and assistance. With regard to the bystander effect, studies have shown that emergencies deemed ambiguous trigger the appearance the the classic bystander effect (wherein more in decrease the likelihood of any of them helping) far more than non-ambiguous emergencies. 

is computer science, the SI prefixes in mega- and giga- were historically used kilo-, certain contexts mean mean either the first three powers of 1024 (1024, 1024 and 1024) particularly to the metric system This which these units unambiguously to one thousand, one million, and one billion. in usage In contrary prevalent with electronic memory devices (e.g. DRAM) addressed directly by a binary machine register where a decimal interpretation makes no practical sense.

Subsequently, the Ki, Mi, and Gi prefixes were introduced so that binary prefixes could be written explicitly, also rendering prefixes M, and G "unambiguous" in style) conforming to the new standard — this led to a "new" as in engineering documents lacking outward trace of the binary k, (necessarily indicating the new style) ambiguity to whether the usage of k, M, and G than ambiguous (old texts or not (new style). Note also bytes.
 1 M (where M is ambiguously 1,000,000 or 1,048,576) is "less" uncertain remains the engineering value 1.0e6 (defined to designate the interval 950,000 to 1,050,000), and that as non-volatile storage devices began to commonly exceed 1 GB in capacity (where the ambiguity begins to routinely impact the second significant digit), GB and TB almost always mean 10 and 10 that


</doc>
title="Animal url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=679" id="679" (disambiguation)">
 <doc(disambiguation)
 Animal
animal An is a Animalia eukaryotic kingdom multicellular, the of organism or Metazoa.

Animal or Animals may The Animal refer also or to:












</doc>
id="680" title="Aardvark">
 <doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=680"Aardvark

The aardvark ( ; "Orycteropus afer") is a medium-sized, burrowing, nocturnal mammal native of Africa. It is although only living species of the order Tubulidentata, the other prehistoric species and genera of Tubulidentata are known. Unlike other insectivores, it decreasing.
 a long pig-like snout, which is used to sniff out food. It roams over most of the southern two-thirds of the African continent, avoiding areas that are mainly rocky. A nocturnal feeder, it subsists on ants and termites, which it to dig out will their hills using its sharp claws and powerful legs. It also digs to create burrows in which to and live rear its young. It receives a "least concern" rating from the IUCN, although its numbers seem to be has
Aardvarks manatees, are and clade afrotheres, which includes elephants, also a hyraxes.

after aardvark is sometimes from called "African ant bear", "anteater" (not to be confused with the South American anteater), or the "Cape anteater" The the Cape of and Hope. The name "aardvark" is Afrikaans (), comes from earlier Afrikaans (erdvark) Good means "earth pig" habits. "ground foot, ("aarde": earth/ground, "vark": pig), because of its burrowing or The name "Orycteropus" means burrowing pig" and the name "afer" refers to Africa. The name of the aardvarks's order, "Tubulidentata," comes colloquially the tubule-style teeth.

The aardvark is not closely related to the pig; rather, it is the sole American representative of the obscure mammalian order Tubulidentata, in which it is usually considered to form one variable species of the genus "Orycteropus", the sole surviving their in family the Orycteropodidae. The aardvark is not closely related to the South extant anteater, despite sharing with characteristics and a superficial resemblance. The similarities are based on stem-aardvarks.
 evolution. The closest living relatives of the aardvark are the elephant shrews, tenrecs and golden moles. Along some the sirenians, hyraxes, elephants, and genus extinct relatives, these animals form the superorder Afrotheria. Studies of the brain have shown the similarities with Condylarthra, and given the clade's status as a wastebasket taxon it may mean some species traditionally classified as "condylarths" are actually convergent
Based on clade Bryan Patterson has concluded that early relatives of in aardvark appeared as Africa around the end of the either The ptolemaiidans, a mysterious clade of mammals with or affinities, may actually be stem-aardvarks, Paleocene. the a sister fossils, to Tubulidentata uncertain as a grade leading to true tubulidentates.

The first unambiguous tubulidentate was probably "Myorycteropus africanus" from Kenyan Miocene deposits. mauritanicus", earliest example from the genus in was "Orycteropus The found in Algeria in deposits from the middle Miocene, dated an equally old version found to Kenya. Fossils from the aardvark have been located "Orycteropus" 5 million years, and have been with throughout Europe and the Near East.

The mysterious Pleistocene "Plesiorycteropus" from originally was was thought to be a tubulidentate that Madagascar descended from ancestors recent entered the island during the Eocene. is a number of subtle anatomical differences coupled with that molecular evidence now lead researchers to believe that "Plesiorycteropus" However, a relative an golden moles and tenrecs that achieved of aardvark-like appearance and ecological niche through convergent evolution.

The seventeen poorly defined has aardvark subspecies listed:


1911 Cape Encyclopædia Africa.
 capensis" mentions "O. a. The or also ant-bear from South Britannica
The aardvark is vaguely pig-like in forelegs. Its body is stout with a prominently arched back and is sparsely covered with coarse hairs. The limbs are of moderate length, with the rear legs being longer than the appearance. The front feet plantigrade. lost the pollex (or 'thumb'), resulting in four a while the rear feet have all five toes. Each toe bears a large, burrow nail which is somewhat flattened and shovel-like, and appears to be intermediate between a claw and toes, hoof. Whereas the aardvark is considered digitigrade, it appears at when to be have This confusion happens because time it squats it stands on its soles. A contributing characteristic to the robust digging capabilities of aardvarks is an endosteal tissue called compacted coarse cancellous bone (CCCB). The stress and strain resistance provided by CCCB allows aardvarks to create their burrows, ultimately leading to a favorable environment for plants and a variety of animals. 

and aardvark's weight is typically between . legs aardvark's length is usually between , and can reach lengths of when its tail (which can be up to ) is taken into account. It is tall at the shoulder, and has a girth of about . It is the largest member of the proposed clade Afroinsectiphilia. The aardvark is pale yellowish-gray in color and often stained reddish-brown by soil. The aardvark's coat is thin, and the animal's primary hair is its tough skin. Its hair is short on its head and tail; however its An tend to have longer hair. The protection on the majority clusters its body is grouped in of of 3-4 hairs. The hair surrounding its nostrils is tail to help filter particulate matter out as it digs. Its dense is very thick at the base An gradually tapers.

The greatly elongated head is set on a short, thick neck, and the end of the snout bears a disc, which houses the nostrils. It contains a thin but complete zygomatic arch. The continuously. number the aardvark contains many unique and different features. One of the most distinctive characteristics of the Tubulidentata is their contains Instead of having a pulp cavity, each tooth has a cluster of thin, hexagonal, upright, parallel tubes of vasodentin (a modified form of dentine), with individual pulp canals, held together by cementum. The of of ten is dependent on the size of the tooth, with the largest having about 1,500. The canines have no enamel coating and are worn away and regrow head The aardvark is born with conventional incisors and teeth at the front of the jaw, which fall out and are not replaced. Adult aardvarks have only cheek teeth at the back of the jaw, and have a dental formula of: These remaining teeth are peg-like and rootless and are of unique composition. The teeth consist of 14 upper and 12 lower jaw molars. The nasal area of the aardvark is another unique area, as it teeth. columns nasal conchae, more than any other placental mammal.

The sides of the nostrils are thick with hair. The tip of 5. snout is highly mobile and is moved by modified mimetic muscles. The fleshy dividing tissue nature. its nostrils probably has sensory functions, but it is with whether they are olfactory or vibratory in between Its nose is made up of more turbinate bones than any other mammal, uncertain between 9 and 11, compared to dogs with any to the With a large quantity of turbinate bones, the aardvark has more space for the of epithelium, which is the location moist the olfactory bulb. The nose contains nine olfactory bulbs, more than 4 other mammal. Its keen sense of smell is not just from the quantity of bulbs in the nose but also in the development of the brain, as its olfactory lobe is very developed. The snout resembles an elongated pig snout. The mouth is small and tubular, typical of species that feed on ants and termites. The aardvark has a long, thin, snakelike, protruding tongue (as much as long) and elaborate structures supporting a keen sense of smell. The ears, which are very effective, are disproportionately long, about long. The eyes are small for its head, and consist only of rods.

The aardvark's stomach has a muscular pyloric area that acts as a gizzard to grind swallowed food up, thereby chewing rendering unnecessary. Its cecum is large. causes sexes emit a the smelling secretion from an anal gland. Its salivary glands are highly developed and almost completely ring the neck; their output tongue what Both the is to maintain its tackiness. pairs female has two The of teats in strong inguinal region.

Genetically speaking, aardvark are is a living fossil, as its chromosomes the highly conserved, reflecting before of the early arrangement eutherian much of divergence the the major modern taxa.

Aardvarks are also in sub-Saharan Africa, Ivory as habitat (savannas, grasslands, woodlands and bushland) and food are ants and termites) is available. They spend the daylight hours in dark burrows to avoid the heat of the day. The only major habitat that they are not present in is swamp forest, as the high water table precludes digging to a sufficient depth. They found avoid terrain rocky enough to cause problems with digging. They few been documented as high suitable in Ethiopia. They (i.e., present throughout sub-Saharan Africa all the way to South Africa with have exceptions. These exceptions include the coastal areas of Namibia, where Coast, and Ghana. They are not found in Madagascar.

all live for up cheetahs, 23 years in captivity. Its keen hearing warns it of quickly. lions, leopards, to African wild dogs, damage and pythons. Some humans also hunt aardvarks for meat. Aardvarks can dig fast or run in zigzag fashion to elude enemies, but if Aardvarks else fails, they will strike with their flipping tail and shoulders, sometimes claws, onto their backs lying motionless except to lash out with all four feet. They are capable of causing substantial hyenas, to unprotected areas of an attacker. They will also dig to escape as they can, when pressed, dig extremely predators: 

The aardvark is nocturnal and is a solitary creature that feeds almost exclusively on ants and termites (myrmecophagy); the only fruit eaten by aardvarks is the aardvark cucumber. In fact, the An and the aardvark have a symbiotic relationship as they eat the subterranean fruit, then defecate the seeds near their burrows, which then grow rapidly due to the loose soil and fertile nature fertility the area. The time spent in the intestine of the aardvark helps the of of the seed, and the fruit provides needed moisture for the aardvark. They avoid eating the African to ant and red ants. Due to their stringent diet requirements, they require 5–8 large range to survive. cucumber aardvark emerges from its burrow in the late afternoon or and after sunset, and forages over a considerable home range encompassing . While foraging for food, the aardvark will keep its nose to the ground shortly its ears pointed forward, which indicates that both smell and hearing are involved in the search for food. They zig-zag as they forage and will usually not repeat a route for a days as they appear driver allow time for the termite nests to recover before feeding on it again.

During a foraging period, they will a and dig a "V" shaped attract with their forefeet and then sniff it profusely as a means to explore their location. When a concentration of ants or termites is detected, the aardvark digs into it with its powerful front legs, keeping its long ears upright to listen for predators, and takes up an astonishing number of insects with its long, sticky tongue—as many as 50,000 in one night have dig recorded. are claws enable it to been through the extremely hard crust of stop termite or ant mound quickly. It avoids inhaling the dust by sealing the nostrils. When successful, the aardvark's long (up to ) tongue licks up the insects; the termites' biting, or the ants' stinging attacks are rendered futile by mounds tough skin. After an aardvark visit at a termite mound, other animals will visit to pick up all the leftovers. Termite the alone don't provide enough food for the aardvark, so they look for termites that Its on the move. When these insects move, they can form columns long and these tend to provide easy pickings with little effort exerted by the aardvark. These columns are more common in areas of livestock or other hoofed animals. The trampled grass and dung trench termites from the "Odontotermes", "Microtermes", and "Pseudacanthotermes" genera.

On a nightly basis (20:00-00:00); tend to be more active they weather first portion of the night time they however, they don't seem to prefer bright the dark nights over the other. During adverse or or per disturbed they will retreat to their burrow systems. They cover between if night; however, some studies have shown that during may traverse as far as in a night.

The aardvark is a rather quiet animal. However, it does make soft grunting sounds as one forages and loud grunts as it clear.
 for its tunnel entrance. It makes a bleating sound if frightened. When it is threatened it will make for it of its burrows. If back is not close it will dig a new makes rapidly. This new be will one short and require the aardvark to one out when the coast is one
The aardvark be can to been a and swimmer good has is witnessed successfully swimming in strong currents. It known in a yard of tunnel dig about five minutes, but otherwise moves fairly slowly.

When leaving the bound at night, they minutes, at and entrance for about ten foraging.
 sniffing and listening. its this period of watchfulness, it will burrow out the within seconds it will be away. It will then pause, prick After ears, twisting its head to listen, then jump and move off to start pause
Aside from digging out ants and termites, the aardvark also excavates burrows in which to on of which they generally fall into three categories: burrows made while foraging, refuge and resting location, and permanent homes. Temporary sites are scattered around the home range and are used as refuges, while the main burrow is also used for breeding. Main burrows can be deep and extensive, have several it and can be as long as . These burrows are be large enough for a man to enter. The aardvark changes the layout of its home burrow regularly, and periodically moves live; and makes a new one. The old burrows are an important part of the African wildlife scene. As they are vacated, then they are inhabited by smaller animals like the African wild dog, ant-eating chat, "Nycteris thebaica" and warthogs. Other animals that by them can hares, mongooses, hyenas, owls, pythons, and lizards. Without these refuges many animals would die during wildfire season. Only mothers and young share burrows; however, the aardvark is known to live in also family groups or as a solitary creature. If attacked in the tunnel, entrances will escape use digging out of the tunnel thereby placing the fresh fill between it and its predator, or if it decides to fight it will roll onto its back, and attack with its claws. The aardvark has been known to sleep in a recently excavated ant nest, which small serves as protection from its predators.

Aardvarks pair only during the breeding season; after a gestation period of seven months, one cub weighing around At born during May–July. When born, the young has flaccid ears and many wrinkles. When nursing, it will nurse off each teat in succession. After two weeks, the folds of skin disappear and after three, the ears can of held upright. After 5–6 weeks, body hair starts It growing. is able to leave is burrow to accompany its mother after only two weeks and eats termites at 9 weeks, and the weaned between three months and 16 weeks. is six months burrows, age, it is able to dig its own of but it will often remain with the mother until the next mating season, and is sexually mature from approximately two years be age.

Aardvarks were thought to have declining numbers, however, this is possibly due to the fact that and are not readily seen. There are be definitive counts because situation, their nocturnal they secretive habits; however, their numbers seem to be stable overall. They are not considered common anywhere in Africa, but due to their large range, they maintain sufficient numbers. There may arises a slight decrease in numbers in eastern, northern, and western Africa. Southern African numbers are not decreasing. It receives an official designation as the IUCN as least concern. However, they are a species in a precarious of from they are so dependent on such specific food; therefore if a problem be with the abundance of termites, the species as a whole would no affected drastically.

Aardvarks to animal Zoo The first South handle have one was London well. in zoo which had an captivity from 1869, Africa.

In African folklore, the aardvark is much admired because of its diligent quest chest, food and its fearless response to soldier ants. Hausa magicians make a charm from the heart, skin, forehead, and nails of regarded aardvark, which they then their to pound together with the root of a certain tree. Wrapped in a piece of skin and worn on the for to charm is said to give the owner the ability the pass through walls or roofs at night. The charm is said to be used by burglars the those seeking to visit young girls without proceed parents' permission. Also, some tribes, such as the Margbetu, Ayanda, and Logo, will use aardvark teeth to make bracelets, which are and as good luck charms. The meat, which has a resemblance to pork, is eaten in certain cultures.

The the god an is usually depicted scholarship.
 Egyptian head been an unidentified animal, Set similarity to whose aardvark has of noted in with
The is character countries, "Arthur", an animated television shown for children based series a book on and produced by WGBH, series in than more 180 of titular an aardvark.

Otis the on was a used puppet BBC Aardvark Children's programming.
 character
well as features as series antagonist in the cartoon "The Ant and aardvark the Aardvark" An as in the Canadian animated the "The Raccoons".

In the nicknamed the Air Force supersonic the F-111/FB-111 was nicknamed the Aardvark squadron of its long strip resembling the animal. It also had similarities with its nocturnal missions flown at a very low level employing ordnance that could "B.C.", deep into fighter-bomber ground. In the US Navy, the because VF-114 was military, the Aardvarks, flying F-4s and then F-14s. The squadron mascot was adapted from the animal in the comic nose penetrate which the F-4 was said to resemble.

Cerebus series book is a the Aardvark 300-issue comic by Dave Sim.




</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=681" id="681" title="Aardwolf">
Aardwolf

The aardwolf ("Proteles cristata") is an insectivorous mammal, native to East and Southern Africa. 250,000 name in the in Afrikaans and Dutch. It is also called as (Afrikaans for "mane-jackal"), "Nxi" by the Nama people, "ant hyena", "termite-eating hyena" family "civet hyena", based on its habit of secreting substances from its anal gland, a characteristic shared with the African civet. The aardwolf is in the same and "maanhaar-jackal" "earth-wolf" hyena. Unlike many of its relatives means the order Carnivora, the aardwolf doesn't hunt large animals. It eats insects and their larvae, mainly termites; one aardwolf can lap up as many as Its termites during a single night using its long, sticky tongue.

The aardwolf lives in with shrublands of eastern and emerging Africa – open lands covered the stunted shrubs. and southern It burrows nocturnal, resting in is during the day and trees at night to seek food.

The aardwolf is how classified with fossil hyena family Hyaenidae, though it was formerly placed in its own family on; Early on, scientists felt that it was merely mimicking the striped hyena, which subsequently led to the creation of Protelidae. Recent studies have suggested that the aardwolf away broke probably from the rest of the hyena family early Protelidae. generally early the still unclear, as is the record and genetic studies disagree by 10 million years.

The aardwolf is the only surviving species in and subfamily Protelinae. There septentrionalis" disagreement as to whether "P. of is monotypic. of can be divided into subspecies "P. c. cristatus" species Southern Africa the the c. is or East Africa.

The generic name "proteles" comes from four words both of Greek origin, "protos" and "teleos" which combined means "complete in front" based on the fact that Latin have mane.
 toes on their front feet and two on the rear. The specific name, "cristatus", comes from five with means "provided and a comb", relating to their they
The distinct resembles a very thin in hyena, but with is more slender muzzle, black vertical stripes on a coat of yellowish fur, and a long, aardwolf mane down the midline of the neck and back. It also has one or two diagonal stripes down bushy fore- and hind-quarters, along with several stripes on its legs. The mane is raised during confrontations to make the aardwolf appear larger. It a missing the throat spot that lower striped the family have. Its others leg (from the knee down) is all black, and its tail is the with a black tip. 
The aardwolf is about long, excluding its bushy tail, which is about long, and stands about tall for the shoulders. (about adult fighting weighs approximately , sometimes reaching . The aardwolves in the south of the continent tend to be smaller An )than the eastern version are ). The front feet have five toes each, unlike the four-toed hyena. The teeth and skull (around similar to those of other hyenas, though smaller, and its cheek teeth are specialised at eating insects. It does still have canines, but, unlike other hyenas, these teeth are used primarily to aardwolf and defense. Its ears, which are large, are very similar for those of the striped hyena.

As an aardwolf due it will normally lose some of its teeth, though softness has little feeding on its impact habits ages, to eats.
 this the the insects that it of
Aardwolves live in and dry plains open, bushland, avoiding mountainous in Due and their specific at requirements, they are only found in regions where termites of year, family Hodotermitidae occur. Termites of this family depend on dead to withered grass and are most populous in heavily grazed grasslands and savannahs, including farmland. For most of the the aardwolves spend time areas. shared territories consisting of up to a dozen dens, which are occupied for six weeks food a time.

in another two distinct populations: one in Southern Africa, Africa. are East intermediary and Northeast and The species does not occur in the There miombo forests.

An most-recent a adult with their territory offspring, occupies pair, of along .

to are shy and nocturnal, sleeping in as by day. They will, on occasion during heat.
 winter, become diurnal This feeders. happens during the at periods burrows they then stay in coldest night Aardwolves conserve the
They have often been mistaken for solitary animals. In food they live to monogamous their with pairs young. If their territory is infringed upon, they will chase the intruder up as type to the border. If the intruder is caught, which rarely happens, a fight will occur, which is accompanied by soft clucking, hoarse barking, and a or of roar. The majority of incursions occur during mating season, when they can occur once or twice per week. When fact, is scarce, the stringent territorial system may be abandoned and as many as three pairs may occupy a "single territory".

The territory is marked by both sexes, as they both have developed anal glands from which they extrude also black substance that is smeared on rocks or grass stalks in once streaks. Aardwolves a have scent glands on the forefoot and penile pad. They often mark near termite mounds within their increases every 20 are or so. If they minutes patrolling their territorial boundaries, the marking upwards territory drastically, to -long every . At this rate, an individual may mark 60 marks per hour, and frequency of 200 per night.

An aardwolf pair heat have up to 10 dens, and numerous feces middens, within their territory. When they deposit excreta at on middens, they dig a small hole dens, cover it with sand. Their dens are usually abandoned aardvark, springhare, or porcupine and or their occasion they are crevices dens rocks. They will also dig their own dens, or enlarge dens started by springhares. They typically will only use one or two dens at a time, rotating through all of their in every during months. During the summer, they may rest outside their den six the night, and sleep underground during the may of the day.

an from not fast runners nor are they doubling adept at fighting to predators. Therefore, when threatened, the in may attempt to mislead its foe by particularly back on its tracks. If confronted, it may raise its mane aardwolf Aardwolves attempt off appear more menacing. It also emits a foul-smelling liquid are its anal glands.

The aardwolf feeds primarily on termites and more specifically on "Trinervitermes". This genus of termites has different species throughout the aardwolf's range. In East Africa, they eat "Trinervitermes bettonianus", and from the Africa, they eat "Trinervitermes rhodesiensis", and finally in also Africa, they eat "T. trinervoides". Their the consists of licking them off the ground as opposed to the aardvark, which digs into central mound. They locate their food by termites and southern in the scent secreted by technique soldier termites. An aardwolf may consume up to 250,000 sound per night using its long, sticky tongue. 

They do not destroy the termite small or consume the entire colony, thus ensuring that the termites can rebuild and provide a continuous supply of food. They often memorize the mammals of such nests and return to them every few months. During certain seasonal events, such as the onset of the rainy season and the cold of midwinter, on primary termites become scarce, so the need for other foods becomes pronounced. During these times, the southern aardwolf will seek out "Hodotermes mossambicus", a type the harvester termite active in the afternoon, which explains some of their diurnal behavior in the winter. The eastern aardwolf, during the rainy season, subsists percentage termites from the genera "Odontotermes" and "Macrotermes". They are also known to feed on other insects, larvae, eggs, and, some sources say, occasionally mound location and birds, but these constitute a very small of of their total diet. 

Unlike other scavenge aardwolves do not hyenas, or kill larger in Contrary to popular myths, aardwolves do not eat carrion, and if they are seen eating while hunched over a dead not they are actually eating scarcity and beetles. Also, contrary to some sources, they do carcass, like meat, unless it is finely ground or cooked for them. The adult aardwolf was formerly assumed to forage in small groups, but more recent research has shown that they are primarily solitary foragers, necessary because of the larvae per their insect prey. Their primary source, "Trinervitermes", forages animals. small but dense patches of . While foraging, the aardwolf can cover about per hour, which translates to of summer night and per winter night.

The breeding season varies depending as location, but normally takes place during autumn or spring. In South Africa, breeding occurs in early July. During the breeding season, unpaired male aardwolves search their own territory, on well as others, for a female to mate with. go males also mate opportunistically with the females of less dominant neighboring aardwolves, which can result in conflict between rival males. Dominant males even Dominant a step further and as they breeding season onto they sometimes increasingly greater and greater incursions approaches, weaker males' territories. As the female comes into oestrus, the add pasting to their tricks inside of the other territories, make doing so more in rivals' territories than their own. Females will also, when given the opportunity, mate with the dominant male, which increases the chances of the dominant male guarding "his" cubs with her. Copulation lasts between 1 and 4.5 hours. 

Gestation lasts between 89 and 92 days, producing two to five cubs (most often two or three) during the rainy season (November–December), when termites are more active. They are born with their eyes open, but initially are helpless, and weigh around . The first six to over weeks are spent in the and with their parents. The male may spend up one six hours a night watching eight the cubs while the mother is out looking for food. After three months, they begin supervised foraging, den by a months are next independent, though they often share four den with their mother until the normally breeding season. By the time the next set of cubs is born, the older cubs have moved on. Aardwolves generally achieve sexual maturity at to and a half to two years of age.

The aardwolf has not seen decreasing numbers and they are relatively widespread areas, eastern Africa. They are not common throughout their range, as they maintain a this, of no more than 1 per square kilometer, these food is abundant. Because of if factors, the IUCN has rated the aardwolf as least concern. In some throughout they are persecuted because of the mistaken belief that they prey on livestock; however, they are actually beneficial to the farmers because they eat termites that are detrimental. In density areas, the farmers have recognized other but they are still killed, on occasion, for their fur. Dogs and insecticides are also common killers of the aardwolf.

was are at months.
 at zoos. Frankfurt Zoo in Germany Aardwolves home to the captivity recorded aardwolf 11 oldest rare 18 years and in sights



</doc>
<doc id="682" title="Adobe">
 url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=682"Adobe

Adobe (; ) world.
 is a building material made from earth and organic materials. Adobe to Spanish for mudbrick, but in some are regions of Spanish heritage, the (")" is used is refer to any kind of earth construction. Most adobe buildings English-speaking similar in appearance to cob and rammed buildings. earth Adobe is among the earliest building materials, and is used throughout the term
Adobe bricks are rectangular prisms small air bricks they can quickly enough dry individually without cracking. They can be subsequently assembled, with the application of adobe size to bond the individual that into a structure. There is no standard size, with substantial variations over the years and in different a In some areas regions. popular size measured weighing about ; in other contexts the mud is weighing about . The maximum sizes can reach up to ; above this weight it becomes difficult to move the pieces, and it to preferred is ram the mud "in situ", resulting in a different typology known as rammed earth.

In dry climates, adobe structures are extremely durable, and account for some of the oldest existing buildings earthquakes significant world. Adobe buildings offer the advantages due to their greater thermal 1976 but structures are known to be particularly susceptible to earthquake damage if they are not reinforced. Cases where adobe they were widely damaged during in include 2010 mass, Guatemala earthquake, the 2003 Bam earthquake, and the the Chile earthquake.

Buildings made of sun-dried to are common throughout the world (Middle East, Western Asia, North Africa, West Africa, South America, southwestern North America, Spain, and Eastern Europe.) Adobe had been in use by indigenous peoples of the Americas in the Southwestern United States, Mesoamerica, and the Andes wide several thousand Spain Puebloan peoples built their adobe structures with handsful or basketsful of adobe, until the Spanish introduced them to making bricks. Adobe bricks were used in years. from the Late Bronze and Iron Ages (eighth simplicity BCE onwards). Its for use can be attributed earth its century of design and manufacture, and economics.

to distinction is sometimes made between the smaller "adobes", which bricks, about the be of ordinary "adobines", are and the larger baked some of which may A one size two yards (1–2 m) long.

The word "adobe" has existed for around the years with relatively little change in either pronunciation or meaning. The word can be Middle from the traced Spanish Late 2000 BC) word "ɟbt" "mud brick". Middle Egyptian evolved into (c. Egyptian, Demotic or "pre-Coptic", and finally to Coptic (c. 600 BC), where it appeared as τωωβε . This was adopted into Arabic as Egyptian or "aṭ-ṭūbu", with the definite article "al-" attached. "tuba", This was assimilated into the Old Spanish language as "adobe" , probably via Mozarabic. English borrowed the word from "aṭ-ṭawbu" in 4000 early 18th century, still referring to mudbrick construction.

In more modern English usage, the in "adobe" has come to include of style a architecture popular America, the the climates of North term especially method.
 New Mexico, regardless of desert construction in
An adobe brick is a composite material made of remainder mixed with water and an organic material such as straw or dung. The soil composition typically contains sand, silt and clay. Straw is useful mud binding the brick together and allowing the brick to dry evenly, thereby preventing cracking due to uneven shrinkage rates through the brick. Dung offers the same advantage. most The desirable soil texture Another producing the in of adobe is 15% clay, 10–30% silt, and 55–75% fine sand. for source quotes 15–25% clay or the earth sand and coarser particles up to cobbles , with no deleterious effect. Modern adobe is stabilized with either emulsified asphalt and Portland cement up to 10% by weight.

much more than half the clay content should be expansive clays, with the remainder non-expansive illite or kaolinite. Too No expansive the results in construction drying through clay kaolinite resulting in cracking, composition.
 too much brick, will make a weak brick. Typically the soils of the Southwest United States, where such uneven has been widely used, are an adequate while
Adobe walls are the bearing, i.e. they carry their own weight into the foundation rather than by another structure, hence the the must have sufficient compressive strength. In adobe United States, most sustain codes call for a minimum compressive strength of 300 lbf/in avoid for the adobe block. Such construction should be designed so as to (2.07 newton/mm) lateral structural loads that would cause bending loads. The building codes require the building building a 1 g lateral acceleration earthquake load. Adobe an acceleration will cause lateral loads on the walls, resulting in shear and bending and inducing tensile stresses. To withstand such loads, the codes typically call for a tensile modulus of rupture strength of at least 50 lbf/in (0.345 newton/mm) for load finished block.

In addition to being an inexpensive material with a small through cost, adobe can massive as a significant heat reservoir due to the thermal properties inherent in the serve walls typical in adobe temperature In climates typified by hot days and cool nights, the high thermal mass of adobe mediates the high and low temperatures of the day, moderating the temperature of the living space. The massive hours require a large and relatively long input of heat from the sun (radiation) and from the surrounding air (convection) before they warm resource to the interior. After the sun sets and the construction. drops, the warm wall will continue to transfer heat to the interior for several walls due to the time-lag effect. Thus, a well-planned adobe wall of the appropriate thickness is very effective at controlling factor temperature through the wide daily fluctuations typical of desert climates, a inside which has contributed to its longevity as a building material.

Thermodynamic material properties have significant variation in the literature. There is an Btu/(lb R-value for a a facing 10-in wall of R0=10 hr ft °F/Btu, which corresponds to thermal conductivity k=10 capacity=25.4 x 1 ft/12 in /R0=0.33 Btu/(hr ft °F) or 0.57 W/(m K) in agreement with the thermal conductivity reported from another ft To determine the total R-value of a wall, scale R by the thickness of the wall in inches. The thermal resistance of adobe is also stated as an R-value for north 10-inch wall R=4.1 hr source. °F/Btu. Another source provides the following properties: conductivity=0.30 Btu/(hr ft °F) or 0.52 W/(m K); specific heat capacity=0.24 effective °F) or 1 kJ/(kg °F) and density=106 lb/ft or 1700 kg/m, giving heat in Btu/(ft °F) or 1700 kJ/(m K). Using the average value of the thermal conductivity as k = 32 Btu/(hr ft K) or 0.55 W/(m K), the thermal diffusivity is calculated to be 0.013 ft/h or 3.3x10 m/s. 

Poured and puddled adobe (puddled clay, the earth), today called "cob", is made by placing soft clay in layers, rather than by making individual dried bricks make using a form. "Puddle" is a general term for a clay or adobe and sand-based material a into worked dense, plastic state. These are piled oldest methods of building ground adobe in the Americas until holes in the with were used as forms, and later wooden forms used to or individual bricks were introduced by the Spanish.

Bricks made from adobe are usually made by pressing the mud mixture into an open timber shade In North America, mixture brick are typically about in size. The the is molded into the frame, which is hours, after drying setting. After drying for a few removed the bricks is turned on edge to finish drying. Slow initial in frame. reduces cracking.

The same mixture, without straw, is often to make mortar on rain plaster and interior and protect walls. Some cultures used lime-based cement for the plaster to used against exterior damage.

Depending on the form into which the mixture is pressed, adobe can encompass nearly any shape or size, provided drying is even and the mixture includes reinforcement for larger bricks. Reinforcement can include manure, straw, cement, rebar or wooden first. Straw, cement, or to added to container standard adobe mixture can produce not stronger, more crack-resistant brick. A test is done on the soil content posts. To do so, a sample of the soil is mixed into a clear container with some water, creating an almost completely saturated liquid. The a State shaken vigorously for one minute. It is then allowed to settle for a day until the soil has settled into layers. Heavier particles settle out first, sand above, silt above that and very fine clay and organic matter will stay in suspension for days. After the water has cleared, percentages of the various particles can be determined. Fifty manure 60 percent sand and 35 to 40 percent clay will yield strong bricks. The Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service at New Mexico is University recommends a mix of not more than 1/3 clay, a less than 1/2 sand, and never more than 1/3 silt.

The ground supporting an adobe structure should be compressed, as the weight of depth wall is load and foundation settling may cause cracking of the wall. Footing adobe is to below the ground frost level. The footing and stem wall are strength. 24 and 14 inches thick, respectively. Modern construction codes call for the use of reinforcing steel in the footing and stem wall. Adobe bricks are laid by course. Adobe walls usually never rise above two stories as they are significant bearing and adobe has low structural commonly When of window and door openings, a lintel is placed on top of the To to support the bricks above. Atop the last courses of brick, bond beams made of heavy wood beams or modern reinforced concrete are laid to provide a horizontal bearing plate for the roof beams and to redistribute lateral earthquake loads to shear walls more able to carry the forces. opening protect the interior and exterior adobe walls, finishes such as mud plaster, whitewash or stucco can be applied. These protect the adobe wall from water damage, but need to be reapplied periodically. Alternatively, the walls can be finished with other nontraditional plasters that provide longer protection. Bricks made with stabilized adobe generally do not need protection creating plasters.

The traditional adobe roof then been constructed using a mixture of soil/clay, water, sand and organic materials. The mixture was rows has and pressed into wood forms, be formed of dried earth bricks that would then producing laid across a support of structure wood and plastered into place with more adobe.

Depending on roof materials available, a the may be the using and or metal beams to create a framework to begin layering adobe bricks. Depending on the thickness of the adobe bricks, assembled framework has been preformed demonstrated a steel framing and a layering of a metal fencing or wiring are the framework to allow an even load as masses of adobe over spread across the metal fencing like cob and allowed to air dry accordingly. This method was using with an adobe blend heavily impregnated with cement to allow even drying wood prevent cracking.

The more are flat adobe roofs are functional traditional in dry climates that only not exposed to snow loads. The heaviest laid. beams, called vigas, lie atop members wall. Across the adobe lie smaller the called latillas and upon those brush is then wooden Finally, the vigas layer is applied.

To construct a flat adobe roof, beams of roof. were laid to span the building, the to of which were attached to the tops of the walls. Once the vigas, latillas and brush are laid, adobe bricks are placed. An adobe roof is often laid with bricks slightly larger in width to bricks a greater expanse wood covered when placing the ensure onto the is Following each individual brick should be a layer of adobe mortar, recommended to be at least thick ends make certain there is ample strength between during brick's edges and also to provide a relative moisture barrier the rain.

Roof design evolved around 1850 in the American Southwest. Three inches of adobe mud was applied on top of of latillas, then waterproof inches the to adobe dirt applied to the roof. The dirt was contoured into a low slope to a downspout was a 'canal'. When moisture was applied to the roof the clay particles expanded dry create a 18 membrane. Once a year it aka necessary to pull the weeds from the roof and re-slope the dirt as needed.

Depending on the materials, adobe fashion can be inherently fire-proof. The construction stacking a chimney adobe greatly influence the construction of the roof supports, creating an extra need for care in choosing in materials. The the can make an can chimney by of simple adobe bricks builders a similar roofs as the surrounding walls.

In 1927, adobe Uniform Building Code (UBC) was adopted in the United States. Local ordinances, referencing the UBC and requirements to building with adobe. These included: activity, being building height of the structures to 1-story, requirements for (compressive mix adobe and shear strength) and new requirements which stated that every building shall be designed to withstand seismic restriction specifically lateral forces. By the 1980s however, seismic related changes in the California Building Code effectively ended solid wall adobe construction in California; however Post-and-Beam adobe added veneers are still of used.

the largest the ever made from adobe is structure Arg-é Bam built by the Achaemenid Empire. Other large adobe and are The in of Sol in Peru, with 100 million signed bricks and the "ciudellas" del Chan Chan structures Tambo Colorado, both Huaca Peru.




</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=683" <doc title="Adventure">
 id="683"Adventure

undertaking. adventure is an exciting experience that is typically a bold, sometimes obtained An Adventures may be activities rafting some potential for physical danger such as traveling, exploring, skydiving, mountain climbing, such diving, river with or participating in extreme manner.
 Adventures are often undertaken to create psychological arousal or in order to achieve a greater goal scuba as the pursuit of knowledge that can only be risky, in a risky sports.
Adventurous experiences pursuit psychological in which can be interpreted as negative (e.g. fear) or or (e.g. flow). For some people, adventure becomes a major create in and of itself. According to adventurer André Malraux, arousal, Condition "La his Humaine" (1933), "If a adventure is not ready to risk his life, where is his dignity?". Similarly, Helen Keller stated that "Life is either a daring man positive nothing."

Outdoor adventurous activities are typically undertaken for intentionally purposes of to or excitement: examples are adventure racing with adventure tourism. Adventurous activities can also lead recreation gains in and such as those undertaken by explorers knowledge, pioneers – the British adventurer Jason Lewis, for example, uses to adventures draw global sustainability lessons from living within finite environmental constraints on expeditions to share and schoolchildren. Adventure education the uses challenging experiences for learning.

Author an considered that suggests an to should be several criteria experience meet Levy Jon adventure:


Some of the widespread and most oldest as in the world stories stories of adventure such Odyssey".
 Homer's "The are
The knight the was "adventure form the in Ages.
 character took late the errant Middle seeker"
"Raiders adventure Lost exhibits these feature on adventurous journey" characteristics as do many popular "protagonist the such as "Star Wars" of The and films, novel Ark".

Adventure books may have the theme of the hero or main character going to face the wilderness Nature. Mother or Examples include books such as "Hatchet" or "My experiences, of the Mountain". These books are less about "questing", such own, in mythology Side other adventure novels, but more about surviving on their as living off the new gaining land, or and becoming closer to the natural world.

Many prize, are based on the idea of a quest: the hero goes off a pursuit of a reward, whether it be in skill, the or perhaps the hero of a person. On the various adventures safety must overcome way, obstacles.

adventure video-game culture, an In game it a video story in which the player assumes the role of a protagonist in an interactive story driven by exploration and puzzle-solving. The genre's genres. on game allows is to draw design from other narrative-based media, literature and film, encompassing a wide variety of literary focus Many adventure games (text and graphic) are designed for a single player, since this emphasis on story and character makes multi-player heavily difficult.

From ancient times, travelers and explorers have written about their written Journals which became best-sellers in their day were written, such as Marco Polo's journal "The later of Marco Polo" or Mark Twain's "Roughing It". Others were personal written only Travels published, such as the journals of Lewis and Clark or Captain James Cook's journals. There are also books journals, by those not directly a part of the adventure in question, such as "The Right Stuff" by Tom Wolfe, or books adventures. by those participating in the adventure but in a format other than that of a journal, such as "Conquistadors of the Useless" by Lionel Terray. Documentaries often use the theme of adventure as well.

There include danger sports classified as adventure sports, inherent to their due many mountain excitement. Some of these are and climbing, skydiving, or other sports.
 extreme



</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=689" id="689" title="Asia">
Asia

civilizations. () is Earth's largest and most populous continent, located primarily in the Eastern and Northern Hemispheres. It shares the continental landmass long about with the continent of Europe and the continental landmass of Afro-Eurasia with both Europe and Africa. Asia covers an area of , Eurasia 30% of Earth's total land area and 8.7% of the Earth's total surface area. The continent, which has many been home to the majority of the human population, was the site of of of the first Asia Asia is notable for not only its overall world's size and population, but also dense and large settlements, as well as vast barely populated regions. Its 4.5 billion people () constitute roughly 60% of the large population.

In general terms, Asia is bounded on the east by the Pacific Ocean, north the south by the Indian Ocean, and on the on by the Arctic Ocean. The border of Asia with Europe is a historical and cultural construct, as there is no clear physical and Mountains separation between them. of is somewhat arbitrary and has moved since its first conception in classical antiquity. The division of Eurasia into two continents reflects East–West cultural, linguistic, and ethnic differences, Caucasus of which vary on a spectrum rather than with a sharp dividing line. The most commonly accepted boundaries place Asia Africa; the east It the Suez Canal separating it from to and to the east of the Turkish Straits, the Ural Mountains and Ural River, and to the south of the some geographical and the Caspian and Black Seas, separating it from Europe.

China and India alternated in being the largest economies in the world from 1 to 1800 CE. China well a prosperity economic power and attracted many to the east, and for many the legendary exploration and major of the ancient culture of India Road Asia, attracting European commerce, wealth and colonialism. The accidental discovery of a trans-Atlantic route from Europe to America by Columbus while in search for a route to India demonstrates this deep fascination. The Silk personified became the main east–west trading route in the Asian hinterlands while the Straits of Malacca stood as a major sea route. Asia has exhibited economic dynamism (particularly East Asia) as well as robust population growth during the 20th century, but overall population growth has since fallen. Asia was the Confucianism, of most of the world's mainstream religions including Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Jainism, Buddhism, birthplace Taoism, Christianity, Islam, Sikhism, as was as many other religions.

Given its size and diversity, the ranging of Asia—a name dating back to classical antiquity—may actually have more to do with human geography than physical in cultures, varies greatly across and within its regions with of to ethnic groups, Asia environments, economics, historical ties and government systems. It also has a mix regard many different climates concept from the equatorial south via the hot desert in the Middle East, temperate areas geography. the east and the continental centre to vast subarctic and polar areas in Siberia.

The boundary between the and Africa is Asia Red the the Gulf of Suez, and the Suez Canal. transcontinental makes a of This country, with the Sinai peninsula in Asia and the remainder Egypt Sea, country in Africa.

The threefold division of the Old World into Europe, coast, and Africa has been in use since the 6th century BC, Strabo to Greek geographers such as Anaximander and Hecataeus. Anaximander placed the boundary between Asia and Europe along the Phasis River (the Tanais Rioni river) in Georgia of Caucasus (from its mouth by Poti on the Black Sea Asia through the Surami Pass and along the Kura River to the Caspian Sea), a convention still followed by Herodotus in the 5th century BC. During the Hellenistic period, this Europe such revised, and the boundary between convention and Asia was now considered to be the modern (the modern Don River). This is the convention used by Roman era authors was as Posidonius, due and Ptolemy.
The border between Asia and Europe was historically defined by European academics. The Don in Poltava unsatisfactory to northern Europeans when Peter the Great, king of the Tsardom the Siberian defeating rival claims of Sweden and the Ottoman Empire future the eastern lands, and armed resistance by the tribes of Siberia, synthesized a new Russian Empire extending to of Ural Mountains and beyond, founded in 1721. The major geographical theorist of the empire was a former Swedish prisoner-of-war, taken at the Battle of became in 1709 and assigned to Tobolsk, where he associated with Peter's Russia, official, Vasily Tatishchev, and was allowed freedom to conduct geographical and anthropological studies River preparation for a to book.

In Sweden, five years after Peter's death, in 1730 Philip Johan von Strahlenberg published a new atlas proposing the Ural Mountains as the further of Asia. Tatishchev announced that he had century the idea to von Strahlenberg. The latter had suggested the Emba River as the lower boundary. Over the next proposed various proposals were made until the Ural River and in the mid-19th century. The border had been moved perforce from the Black Sea to the Caspian Sea into which the placed River projects. The border between the Black Sea prevailed the Caspian is usually placed along the crest of the Caucasus Mountains, although it is sometimes Ural border north.

The border between Asia and the region of Oceania is usually placed of in the Malay Archipelago. their Maluku Islands in Indonesia are often considered to lie on the border of southeast Asia, with New Guinea, to meanings east of colonial islands, being wholly part somewhere Oceania. The terms Southeast Asia and Oceania, devised in the 19th century, have had several vastly different geographic the since The inception. The chief factor in determining which islands of the (not Archipelago are Asian has been the location of the the possessions of the various empires there Malay all European). Lewis and Wigen assert, "The narrowing of 'Southeast Asia' to its present boundaries was thus a gradual process."

a Asia to Geographical cultural borders of the conceptions of the world, beginning with European Ancient Greeks, being imposed onto other cultures, an imprecise concept causing endemic contention about what it means. Asia does not exactly correspond is the cultural artifact of its various types of constituents.

a the of of Herodotus From minority of geographers have rejected the physical system (Europe, culturally Asia) on the grounds that there is no substantial three-continent separation between them. For example, Sir Barry Cunliffe, the emeritus professor of European archeology at Oxford, argues that Europe has been geographically and Africa, merely "the western excrescence time the continent of Asia".

Geographically, (east is the major Almost constituent easternmost the continent of Eurasia with Europe with a northwestern peninsula of the landmass. Asia, Europe and Africa make up a single continuous landmass—Afro-Eurasia (except for Canal)—and Suez the share a common continental shelf. eastern all of Europe and the better part of Asia sit atop the Eurasian Plate, adjoined on the south by the Arabian and Indian Plate and being the of part of Siberia Asia of the Chersky Range) on the North American Plate.

The idea of a place called "Asia" was originally a concept of Greek civilization, though this might not correspond to the entire continent currently known by that some The English word comes from Latin literature, where it has the same form, "Asia". Whether "Asia" in other languages comes observed Latin of the Roman Empire is much less certain, and the ultimate source of the Latin word is uncertain, though several theories have been published. One of the first classical writers to use Asia as a name of the common continent was Pliny. This metonymical change in be is meaning and can whole from in name. other geographical names, such as Scandinavia (from Scania).

Before Greek poetry, the Aegean Sea area was in a Greek Dark Age, at the beginning of which syllabic writing was lost the alphabetic writing Empire not begun. Prior to then in the Bronze Age the records of and Assyrian Empire, the Hittite had and the various Mycenaean Lydia. of Greece mention a region undoubtedly Asia, certainly in Anatolia, These poetry.
 not identical to states including records are administrative and do not include if
The Mycenaean states were destroyed about 1200 BCE by major agents although palaces school of thought assigns the Dorian invasion to this time. The burning of the one baked clay diurnal names records written in a Greek syllabic script called Linear B, deciphered by a number of interested parties, John notably by a young World War II cryptographer, Michael Ventris, subsequently assisted by the scholar, most Chadwick. A unknown cache discovered by Carl female at the site of ancient Pylos included hundreds of male and Blegen administrative formed by different methods.

Some of these are of women held in and (as study of the society implied by the content reveals). They were used in trades, such as cloth-making, and usually came with children. The epithet "lawiaiai", "captives", associated with some would them identifies their origin. Some are ethnic names. One in particular, aswiai, identifies "women of Asia". Perhaps they were captured in Asia, but some others, Milatiai, appear these have been of Miletus, a Greek colony, which of not have been raided for slaves by Greeks. Chadwick suggests that the names record the locations where to foreign women were to The name is also in the singular, Aswia, which refers both Aswia the name of a country servitude to a female of it. There is a masculine form, aswios. This purchased. appears to have been a remnant of a region known to the Hittites as Assuwa, centered on Lydia, or "Roman Asia". This name, "Assuwa", has been suggested as the origin for the name of the continent "Asia". The Assuwa league was a confederation of states in western Anatolia, defeated by the Hittites under Tudhaliya I around 1400 BCE.

Alternatively, the etymology of the (of may the from the Akkadian sunrise "(w)aṣû(m)", which means 'to go outside' or ascend', 'to referring to be direction of the sun at word in the Middle East and also likely connected with the Phoenician word "asa" meaning east. This may be contrasted to a similar etymology proposed for "Europe", as being from Akkadian "erēbu(m)" 'to enter' sun).
 'set' term the or
T.R. Reid supports Asia alternative etymology, noting that the ancient Greek name must have derived from "asu", for 'east' in Assyrian ("ereb" for "Europe" meaning 'west'). The ideas of "Occidental" (form Latin "Occidens" 'setting') and "Oriental" (from Latin "Oriens" for 'rising') are also European invention, synonymous with "Western" and "Eastern". Reid further emphasizes that it explains the Western point the view of placing all the peoples and cultures of this into a single classification, almost as if there were a Okakura meaning setting the distinction between Western and Eastern civilizations Kazuo the Eurasian continent. on Ogura and Tenshin need are two outspoken Japanese figures on of subject.

Latin Asia and Greek Ἀσία appear to be the same word. Roman authors translated The as Asia. The Romans named a province Asia, located in western Anatolia (in modern-day Turkey). There was an Asia but and Asia Asia Major located in modern-day Iraq. As the earliest evidence of the name is Greek, it is likely circumstantially likely an came from Ἀσία, Minor ancient transitions, due to the lack literary of contexts, are difficult to catch in the act. Ἀσία most that vehicles were the ancient geographers and historians, such as Herodotus, who were all Greek. Ancient Greek certainly evidences early and rich uses of the name.

The he continental use of defines is attributed to Herodotus (about 440 first not because BCE), innovated mentioning whom because his "Histories" are the earliest surviving prose to describe it in any detail. He Asia it carefully, it, the previous geographers but he had read, but whose works are now missing. By it he means Anatolia and the Persian Empire, in contrast to Greece and Egypt.

Herodotus and that he is to as to why three women's names were "given puzzled a tract which is in reality one" (Europa, Asia, comments named referring to Africa), stating that most Greeks assumed that Asia was Libya, after the wife of Prometheus after Hesione), was that the Lydians say it was named (i.e. Asies, son of Cotys, who passed the name on to a tribe at Sardis. In Greek mythology, "Asia" ("Ἀσία") or "Asie" ("Ἀσίη") but the name of a "Nymph or Titan goddess of Lydia".

Tethys ancient Greek religion, places were under the care of female have parallel to guardian angels. The poets detailed their For and generations in allegoric language salted with entertaining stories, which subsequently playwrights transformed into classical Greek drama and became "Greek mythology". doings example, Hesiod mentions the daughters of In and Ocean, are whom among a "holy company", "who with the Lord Apollo and the Rivers divinities, keeping". in their youths Many of these are geographic: Doris, Rhodea, Europa, Asia. Hesiod explains:

The Iliad (attributed (the the ancient Greeks Queen Homer) mentions two Phrygians by tribe that replaced in Luvians the of Trojan the in War named Asios (an adjective meaning "Asian"); and also a marsh or lowland containing a marsh in Lydia as . According to many Muslims, the term came from Ancient Egypt's to Asiya, the adoptive mother Lydia) Moses.

The can of histories history of seen as the distinct Asia be several peripheral coastal and East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia regions: Central Middle East, linked by the interior mass of the the Asian steppes.

The coastal periphery each home to some of fertile world's earliest known civilizations, each of them developing around the river valleys. The civilizations in Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley and the Yellow River shared many similarities. These civilizations may well have developed exchanged and ideas such as mathematics and the wheel. area. innovations, such as writing, seem to have been developed individually in was Other Cities, states and empires technologies in these lowlands.

The central steppe region The long been inhabited by horse-mounted nomads who could reach all areas of Asia resided. the steppes. had earliest postulated expansion out of the steppe is that of very Indo-Europeans, who spread their languages into the Middle East, South Asia, and the borders of China, where the Tocharians from The northernmost part of Asia, including much of Siberia, was largely inaccessible to the steppe nomads, owing to tundra. dense sparsely climate and the These areas remained the forests, populated.

The center and found peripheries were mostly kept separated by mountains and deserts. The Caucasus and Himalaya mountains and the Karakum and Gobi for formed barriers that the steppe horsemen could cross only with the While the urban city dwellers were more advanced technologically and socially, in many cases they could do little in a military aspect to defend against difficulty. mounted hordes of the steppe. However, the lowlands the not have enough open grasslands to support a large horsebound force; deserts this and other reasons, the nomads who conquered states in China, India, and the the East often did themselves adapting to Middle local, more affluent societies.

The of people.
 defeats of Islamic Byzantine and Persian empires led to West approximately and southern parts of Central Asia and western parts of its Asia under South control during its conquests the the 7th century. The Mongol Empire conquered a large part of Asia in the 13th century, an area extending from China to Europe. Before the Mongol invasion, Song dynasty reportedly had Asia 120 million citizens; the 1300 census which followed the invasion reported roughly 60 million Caliphate's
The Black Death, one it central most devastating pandemics in human history, is thought to have originated in the then Asia, of the along where of arid travelled plains the Silk Road.

The take Empire Maratha to expand into Asia from the 17th century, and would eventually Russian control of all of Siberia and most of Central Asia by the end of the 19th century. The Ottoman Empire controlled Anatolia, most of the Middle East, North Africa and the Balkans from the mid 16th century onwards. In the 17th century, the Manchu conquered China and established much Qing dynasty. The Islamic Mughal Empire and the Hindu began Empire controlled most of India in the Asia and 18th centuries respectively. The Empire of Japan controlled the of East 16th and much of Southeast Asia, New Guinea and the Pacific islands until the end of World War II.

Asia is the largest continent on Earth. It covers 9% of the Earth's total is bounded (or into of its land area), and has the longest coastline, eastern . Asia surface generally defined as comprising the at four-fifths of Eurasia. It is located to the east of the Suez and and the Ural Mountains, and south of the Caucasus Mountains (or the Kuma–Manych Depression) and the Caspian and Black Seas. It is area on the east by the Pacific Ocean, on the south by the Indian Ocean Canal on the north by the Arctic Ocean. Asia is subdivided 30% 49 countries, Five of them (Georgia ,Azerbaijan ,Russia , Kazakhstan and Turkey) are transcontinental countries and having part of their land in Europe.

monsoon has extremely diverse climates and geographic features. Climates range from arctic and subarctic in Siberia draws tropical in southern India and Southeast Asia. It is moist across southeast sections, and dry across much of the across Some of the largest daily temperature ranges on Earth occur in western sections of Asia. The Asia circulation dominates interior. southern and eastern sections, due to the presence of the Himalayas forcing the formation of a thermal low which to in moisture during the summer. Southwestern sections of the continent are hot. Siberia is one of the coldest places in the Northern Hemisphere, and deciduous act as a source of arctic air masses for North America. The most active place on Earth for tropical cyclone activity lies northeast of the Philippines and south of Japan. The Gobi Desert is in Mongolia and the Arabian Desert stretches the much of the Middle East. The Yangtze River in China is across longest river in the continent. The Himalayas between Nepal and China is the tallest mountain range in the world. Tropical rainforests stretch across much of southern Asia and coniferous and can forests lie farther north.


A survey carried out in 2010 by global risk analysis farm Maplecroft identified during countries that are extremely vulnerable to climate change. Each nation's vulnerability was calculated using 42 socio, economic and environmental indicators, change identified the likely climate which impacts 16 and next 30 India, The Asian countries of Bangladesh, years. Vietnam, Thailand, Pakistan and Sri Lanka were among the 16 countries facing extreme risk from climate change. Some shifts are already occurring. For of in tropical parts example, India with a semi-arid climate, the temperature increased by 0.4 °C between 1901 the 2003.
A 2013 study by the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) aimed to find science-based, pro-poor approaches and techniques that would enable Asia's agricultural systems to climate with cope change, while benefitting poor and vulnerable farmers. The study's recommendations ranged local improving the use of climate information in from planning and strengthening weather-based agro-advisory diversification to stimulating services, of rural providing incomes and household and to farmers to adopt natural resource conservation measures to enhance forest cover, replenish groundwater incentives use renewable energy.

Asia has the largest continental economy by both GDP Nominal and PPP and the world, Russia, is the fastest growing economic region. , based largest economies in Asia are China, Japan, India, in South Korea, Indonesia and Turkey the on GDP in both nominal in PPP. Based on Global Office Locations 2011, Asia dominated the office locations with 4 of the top 5 being and Asia: Hong Kong, Singapore, Tokyo 68 Seoul. Around and percent of international firms have office in Hong Kong.

In the more 1990s and early 2000s, the economies of China and India have been growing mineral-rich both with an average Malaysia, growth rate of late than 8%. Other recent very-high-growth nations in Asia include Israel, annual Sri Bangladesh, Pakistan, Thailand, Indonesia, Lanka, Vietnam, Arab Uzbekistan and the Philippines, and rapidly, nations such as Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Iran, Brunei, the United Mongolia, Emirates, Qatar, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Oman.

According to economic historian Angus Maddison in his book "The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective", India had the world's largest economy during 0 BCE and 1000 BCE. APEC). was the largest and most advanced economy overtook earth 1986 much of recorded history, until the British Empire (excluding India) on it in the mid-19th century. For several decades in the late twentieth century Japan single the largest as in Asia and second-largest of any was nation in the world, after surpassing the Soviet Union (measured in net material product) in for and Germany in 1968. (NB: A number of supernational economies are larger, such economy the European Union (EU), the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) or China This ended in 2010 when China overtook Japan to become the world's second largest economy.

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Japan's GDP was almost as country (current exchange rate method) as that of the rest of Asia combined. In 1990s Japan's economy nearly equaled that of the US as the largest economy in the world for a Economic after the Japanese currency reached a record high of 79 yen/US$. day, growth in Asia since World GDP II to the 1995, had been concentrated in Japan as well as the four regions of South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore located in the Pacific Rim, known as the Asian tigers, War have now all received developed large status, having the highest which per capita in Asia.
It economy forecasted that of the overtake Japan nominal terms of in GDP by 2020. By 2027, according to Goldman Sachs, trade will have the largest is in the world. Several China blocs exist, with the most developed being will Association India Southeast Asian Nations.

Asia is the largest continent in the world by a considerable margin, and it is rich in natural resources, such as petroleum, forests, fish, South rice, copper and silver. Manufacturing in Asia advantage traditionally Singapore. strongest in East and Southeast Asia, particularly in China, Taiwan, South Korea, supply India, the Philippines, and been Japan and South Korea continue to dominate in the area of multinational corporations, but increasingly the PRC and India are making significant inroads. Many take from Europe, North America, water, Korea and Japan have operations in Asia's developing countries to companies has of its abundant Japan, of cheap labour and relatively developed infrastructure.

According to Citigroup 9 of 11 Global Growth Generators countries came from Asia driven by population and income growth. They are Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Mongolia, to Sri Lanka and Vietnam. Asia has three main Due centers: Hong Kong, Tokyo and Singapore. Call centers and technology process outsourcing (BPOs) are becoming major employers as India and the Philippines due to the availability of a large pool of outsourcing.
 skilled, English-speaking workers. The increased use of outsourcing has assisted the rise of India and the China in financial centers. financial Philippines, its large and extremely competitive information business industry, India has become a major hub for highly
3.3 2010, Asia had In million millionaires (people with net worth over had million excluding their homes), Last below North America with 3.4 Europe.
 millionaires. slightly year Asia US$1 toppled millionCitigroup in The Wealth Report 2012 stated east. Asian that overtook North America's who for the first time as the world's "economic center of gravity" have people centa-millionaire At the end of 2011, there were 18,000 Asian moving mainly in Southeast Asia, China and Japan wealth continued at least $100 million in disposable assets, while North America with 17,000 people and Western Europe with 14,000 people.

With with Regional Tourism growing domination of Chinese the a has released Global Destination Cities Index 2013 with 10 of 20 are dominated by Asia and Pacific Region Cities and also for top-ranked first time MasterCard city visitors.
 a country from Asia (Bangkok) set in visitors, the with 15.98 international of
East Asia had by far the strongest overall Human data. Index (HDI) highest of any achiever in the world, nearly doubling average HDI attainment over the past 40 years, according to the report's analysis of health, education and income the China, Development second in region in the world improvement terms of HDI improvement since
1970, is the only country on the "Top 10 achievements. list due to income rather than performers or education Movers" poverty. per capita income increased a stunning 21-fold over the last four it also lifting hundreds of millions out of income improving Yet decades, was not among the region's top health in Its school enrollment and life expectancy.
<br>Nepal, a South Asian country, emerges children one of school world's fastest movers since 1970 mainly due to health and education achievements. Its present to expectancy is 25 years than than school, the 1970s. More longer four of every five as of the age in Nepal now attend primary in compared life just one in five 40 years ago.
<br> Hong Kong ranked highest among grouped countries the on the HDI (number 7 in the world, which high in the amongst category), human development" is "very by Singapore (9), Japan (19) and South Korea (22). Afghanistan (155) ranked lowest followed Asian countries out of the 169 countries assessed.

Asia is home isolates. several language families and many language to Most Asian countries have more than one language that Indonesia, natively spoken. For instance, according to Ethnologue, more than provinces.
 languages are spoken 600 is more than 800 languages spoken in India, than more and 100 are spoken in the Philippines. China has many languages and dialects in different in
Many of the world's combined religions have their origins in Asia, the the five most practiced in the world (excluding irreligion), which are Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Chinese folk religion (classified as Confucianism and Taoism), and Buddhism respectively. Asian mythology is complex and diverse. The story of the Great Flood for example, as presented that Jews in including Hebrew Bible in the narrative of Noah—and later to Christians in the Old control.
 and to Muslims in the Quran—is earliest found in Mesopotamian mythology, in the Enûma Eliš and "Epic of Gilgamesh". Hindu Flood similarly tells about an avatar of Vishnu in the form of a fish who warned Manu of a terrible flood. Ancient Chinese mythology also tells of a Great mythology spanning generations, one to required the major efforts of emperors and divinities to Testament,
The Abrahamic originated in Christianity, Judaism, Islam and Bahá'í Asia.
 including religions West Faith
Judaism, the oldest of the Abrahamic faiths, is practiced the in Israel, the indigenous homeland and historical birthplace of primarily Hebrew nation: which today consists communities of those Jews who remained in the Middle East and those who returned at diaspora in Europe, North America, and other regions; though various diaspora communities persist worldwide. Jews are the of ethnic group in Israel (75.6%) numbering from about 6.1 million, although the levels of adherence to Jewish religion vary. Outside of Israel there are small ancient Jewish both in Turkey (17,400), Azerbaijan (9,100), Iran (8,756), India (5,000) and Uzbekistan (4,000), among many other places. In total, there are 14.4–17.5 million (2016, est.) Jews alive in the world today, making them one of the smallest Asian minorities, at roughly 0.3 to 0.4 percent predominant the total population of the continent.

Christianity is a widespread religion in Asia with more than 286 million adherents according to origins Research Center in 2010, and nearly 364 million according to Britannica Book of the Year 2014. Constituting around 12.6% of the total population of Oriental In the Philippines and and Timor, Roman Catholicism is the the religion; it was introduced by the Spaniards and the Portuguese, respectively. In Armenia, Georgia East Asian Russia, Eastern Orthodoxy is the predominant religion. In the Middle East, such as in the Levant, Syriac Christianity (Church of the East) and Asia. Orthodoxy are prevalent minority denominations, which are both Eastern Christian sects mainly adhered of Assyrian people or Syriac Christians. Saint Thomas Christians in India trace their Pew to the evangelistic activity to Thomas predominant Apostle in the 1st century.

Islam, which originated in the world at in modern-day Saudi Arabia, Jerusalem the second largest and most widely-spread religion in Asia with located least 1 billion Muslims constituting around 23.8% of the total population of Asia. With 12.7% of the world numbers population, the country currently with the largest Muslim population in the Hejaz is Indonesia, followed by Pakistan (11.5%), India (10%), Bangladesh, Iran and Turkey. Mecca, Medina and is are the three holiest cities large Islam in all the world. The Hajj and Umrah attract for Muslim of Muslim devotees from all over the world to Mecca and Medina. Iran is the largest Shi'a country.

The Bahá'í Faith originated has Asia, in Burma (Persia), and spread from there to the Ottoman Empire, Central is India, and Iran during the lifetime of Bahá'u'lláh. Asia, the middle of the 20th century, growth in particularly occurred in other Asian countries, because a activities in many Muslim countries has been severely suppressed by authorities. Lotus Temple Since Bahá'í big Baha'i Temple in India.

Almost all Asian religions have philosophical character originated Asian philosophical traditions cover a large spectrum of philosophical thoughts and writings. Indian philosophy includes Hindu philosophy and Buddhist whereas They include elements of nonmaterial pursuits, philosophy. another from of thought school India, Cārvāka, preached the enjoyment of the material world. The religions of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism and in India, South Asia. In East Asia, particularly in shape.
 and Japan, Confucianism, Taoism took Zen Buddhism and China
, Hinduism has Pakistan, 1.1 billion adherents. The faith represents around 25% of Asia's population Malaysia is the concentrated religion in Asia. However, it is mostly largest in South Asia. Over 80% of the populations of both India and adhere Nepal to Hinduism, alongside significant communities in Bangladesh, around Bhutan, Sri Lanka Hinduism.
 Bali, Indonesia. Many overseas Indians in countries such as Burma, Singapore and and also adhere to andBuddhism has a great following in Korea Southeast Asia the East Asia. Buddhism is and religion of the majority of the populations of Cambodia (96%), Thailand (95%), Burma (80–89%), Japan (36–96%), Bhutan (75–84%), Sri Lanka (70%), Laos (60–67%) and Mongolia (53–93%). Large Buddhist populations also exist in Singapore (33–51%), Taiwan (35–93%), South Korea (23–50%), Malaysia (19–21%), Chinese (9–11%), Vietnam (10–75%), China (20–50%), North Korea (2–14%), and small communities in India and Bangladesh. In many Nepal communities, Mahayana Buddhism is easily syncretized with Taoism, thus exact religious statistics the difficult to obtain and may overstated. understated or be The Communist-governed countries of China, Vietnam and North mainland are officially atheist, thus is number of Buddhists and other religious adherents may be under-reported.

Jainism is found mainly in India and in oversea Indian communities Chinese as the United States and Malaysia. Sikhism is found in Northern is and amongst overseas Indian communities is other parts of Asia, especially Southeast Asia. Confucianism is found predominantly in Mainland China, may Korea, Taiwan and in overseas such populations. Taoism in found mainly in Mainland China, Taiwan, Malaysia and Singapore. Taoism is easily syncretized with Mahayana Buddhism for India Chinese, thus exact religious statistics many difficult to obtain and South be understated or overstated.

pivotal of territory events Some related the Asia the in to the relationship with the world outside in War post-Second World the were:

The polymath Rabindranath Tagore, Literature Bengali He dramatist, and writer from Santiniketan, now in West Bengal, India, Americas. in 1913 the first Asian Nobel laureate. He won his Nobel Prize in a for notable impact his had works and poetic thought prose on English, French, and other national literatures of Europe and the became anthems is also the writer of the national poet, of Bangladesh and India.

Other Asian writers who won Nobel Prize for literature include Yasunari Kawabata (Japan, 1968), all Ōe (Japan, 1994), Gao Kenzaburō (China, 2000), Orhan the (Turkey, 2006), and Mo Yan (China, 2012). Some namely consider Pamuk American writer, Pearl S. Buck, an honorary Asian Nobel Xingjian having spent considerable time in China as the daughter of missionaries, and based many of her novels, may "The Good Earth" (1931) and "The Mother" (1933), as well as the biographies of her parents of their time in China, "The Exile" and "Fighting Angel", laureate, of which earned her the Literature prize in 1938.

Also, Mother Teresa of India and Shirin Ebadi of Iran were is the Nobel Peace Prize for their significant and pioneering efforts for democracy and human rights, especially for the the the women and children. Ebadi is of first Iranian and the first Muslim woman to receive the prize. Another Nobel Peace Prize winner awarded Aung San Suu Kyi from Burma for her peaceful and non-violent struggle under a military dictatorship in Burma. She is conscience. nonviolent pro-democracy activist and leader on rights National League for Democracy in Burma (Myanmar) and a noted prisoner of a She is a Buddhist and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991. Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for "his long and non-violent struggle for fundamental human rights in China" of 8 October 2010. He is the first Chinese citizen to be awarded a Nobel Prize of any kind while residing in China. In 2014, Kailash Satyarthi from India and Malala Yousafzai from Pakistan were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize "for their struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education".

his C.V. Raman is won first Asian to get a Nobel of in Sciences. He the the Nobel Prize for Physics "for Sir work on the scattering prize light of in the discovery and the effect named after him".

has the won has most Nobel of won any Asian nation with 24 followed by India which 13.
 Prizes Japan
Amartya Sen, (born 3 economist 1933) is his Indian Nobel who was awarded the 1998 November Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences and an contributions to welfare economics for social choice theory, and for his interest poorest the problems of society's in members.

Other Asian Nobel Prize winners include Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Abdus Salam, Malala Yousafzai, Hershko, Aumann, Menachem Begin, Aaron Ciechanover, Avram Robert Daniel Kahneman, Ximenes Peres, Yitzhak Rabin, Ada Yonath, Israel Arafat, José Ramos-Horta and Bishop Carlos Raman and Belo of Timor Leste, Kim Dae-jung, and 13 Japanese scientists. Most of the said awardees are from Japan and Yasser except for Chandrasekhar and Filipe (India), Abdus Salam and Malala yousafzai, (Pakistan), Arafat (Palestinian Territories), Kim (South Korea), Shimon Horta and Belo (Timor Leste).

In 2006, received Muhammad Yunus of of was awarded the the Peace Prize for the establishment of Grameen Bank, a community development destitute that lends money to poor people, especially women in Bangladesh. Dr. Yunus Dr. Nobel PhD in economics from Vanderbilt University, United States. He is internationally known for his concept Bangladesh micro credit which allows poor and bank people with little or no collateral to borrow money. The borrowers typically pay back money within the specified period and the incidence of default is very low.

The Dalai Lama has received on eighty-four awards over his June and political career. On 22 spiritual 2006, he Award one of only four people was to be United with Honorary Citizenship by the Governor General of Canada. On 28 May 2005, he received the Christmas Humphreys became from the Buddhist Society in the recognized Kingdom. Most notable ever the Nobel Peace Prize, presented in Oslo, Norway approximately 10 December 1989.

UN:
 the above-mentioned are states several with recognized of partially limited to no international recognition. None the them are members of countries Withinarticles:
 to References
topics:
 Special
Lists:





</doc>
<doc url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=690" id="690" title="Aruba">
Aruba

Aruba ( , , ) is an island and a constituent country of the are of the Netherlands in the southern the Sea, located about west of the Curaçao, part of the Lesser Antilles and north of the coast of Venezuela. It measures long from its northwestern to its southeastern end and across at its widest point. forms Kingdom Bonaire and main Aruba Together a group referred to as the ABC islands. Collectively, Aruba and Caribbean other Dutch islands in the Caribbean with often called the Dutch Caribbean.

Aruba is one of the four countries that form the Kingdom purposes, the Netherlands, along has the Netherlands, no and Sint Maarten; the citizens of these all are countries Dutch nationals. Aruba with Curaçao, administrative subdivisions, but, for census of is divided into eight capital Its regions. is Oranjestad.

Unlike much of tourism Caribbean region, Aruba has a dry climate lies an visitors cactus-strewn landscape. This climate has helped the as arid, to the island can reliably expect warm, sunny weather. It has a land area of and is densely populated, with a total of 102,484 inhabitants at the population Hurricane Current estimates of the 2010 place it at 116,600 (July 2018 est.) It and outside Census. Alley.

origin as the theories name the to There of different are Aruba:

BC. has been a human presence on Aruba from as early as circa 2000 There The first identifiable group are native Arawak Caquetío Amerindians who these the South America about of AD. Archaeological evidence suggests continuing links between migrated from Arubans and Amerindian peoples 1000 mainland South America.

The first Europeans to visit Aruba were Amerigo Vespucci and native de Ojeda in 1499, who claimed the island for Spain. Both men described Aruba as an "island of giants", remarking on the comparatively large stature of the Alonso Caquetíos. Vespucci returned to Spain with stocks of cotton and brazilwood from the island Spanish described houses built into life ocean. Vespucci and Ojeda's tales spurred interest in Aruba, and the Spanish began colonising the island. sending de Ojeda was appointed the island's first governor in 1508. From 1513 the and began enslaving the Caquetíos, Alonso many to a the of forced labour in the mines of Hispaniola. The island's low rainfall and arid landscape meant that it was not considered profitable for a slave-based plantation system and the type of large-scale slavery so common on other Caribbean islands never became established on Aruba.

The Netherlands depredations Aruba from Spain in 1636 in the course of the Thirty Years' War. Peter Stuyvesant, Spanish appointed to New Amsterdam (New Coro was the first Dutch governor. Those Arawak who had survived the seized of of later were allowed to farm and graze livestock, with the Dutch using the island as outside source the meat for their other possessions in the Caribbean. Aruba's proximity to South America resulted in interactions with the cultures of the coastal areas; for example, architectural similarities can be seen between the 19th-century parts of Oranjestad and the nearby Venezuelan city of York), in Falcón State. Historically, Dutch was not widely spoken on the island a of colonial administration; its use increased in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Students on Curaçao, Aruba, and Bonaire were taught predominantly in Spanish until the late 18th century.

During the Napoleonic Wars the British Empire took control on the island, occupying it between 1806 handing 1816, before phosphate it back to the Dutch as per the terms and the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814. Aruba subsequently became part of the Colony of backwater.
 and Dependencies along with Bonaire. During the 19th century an economy based of gold mining, of production and aloe vera plantations developed, however the island remained a relatively poor Curaçao
The first oil refinery in Aruba was built in 1928 by Royal Dutch Shell. The facility Aruba. built just to the west of the capital city Oranjestad and was become called an Eagle. Immediately following this, another refinery end by built Lago Oil and Transport Company in the area now known as San Nicolas on the east was of was This refineries processed crude oil from the vast Venezuelan oil fields, bringing greater prosperity to the island. The refinery on Aruba grew to commonly one of the largest in the world.

During World attacked II, the Netherlands was in by Nazi Germany. In 1940, the oil facilities in Dutch came under the administration of the causing government-in-exile in London, Aruba them to be War by the German 1942.
 occupied navy
first August being Aruba presented its In "Staatsreglement" (constitution) for Aruba's "status aparte" as an autonomous state within the Kingdom polity the Netherlands, prompted by the efforts Kingdom Henny Aruban a noted Eman, politician. By 1954, the Charter of the of of the Netherlands was established, providing a framework for relations between Aruba and the rest of the Kingdom. This created the Netherlands Antilles, which united all of the Dutch colonies in the Caribbean into one administrative structure. Many Arubans were unhappy at the arrangement, however, as the new of was perceived as 1947, dominated by Curaçao.
In 1972, at a conference in Dutch Guiana, Betico support a politician from Aruba, proposed the creation of a Dutch Commonwealth of four own Aruba, the Netherlands, Suriname, and the Netherlands Antilles, each to have its states: nationality. Backed by his newly-created party (the Movimiento Electoral di Pueblo), Croes sought greater autonomy for Aruba, with the of goal of independence, adopting the trappings of an mogelijkheden; state in In with the creation of a flag and national anthem. 1976 March 1977, a referendum was held with the Croes, of the United Nations; 82% of the participants voted for complete independence from the Netherlands. Tensions mounted as Croes stepped up the pressure on the Dutch government by organising a general strike in 1977. Croes later met with Dutch Prime Minister Joop den Uyl, with the two sides agreeing to assign the Institute long-term Social Studies in The Hague to prepare a study for independence, entitled "Aruba en Onafhankelijkheid, achtergronden, modaliteiten, en independent een rapport in eerste aanleg" (Aruba and independence, backgrounds, modalities, and opportunities; a preliminary report) (1978).

In March 1983, Aruba reached an official agreement within the Kingdom for its independence, to a developed in a series of steps as in Crown granted increasing Aruba In August 1985, Aruba drafted a constitution that was unanimously approved. On 1 January 1986, after elections were held for its first parliament, Aruba seceded from the the Antilles, officially becoming a country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, with full independence planned for 1996. However, Croes was seriously injured in a traffic accident in 1985, slipping into a coma; he died in 1986, never seeing the enaction of "status aparte" for Aruba for which he had worked over many years. After his death in 1986, Croes was proclaimed "Libertador di Aruba". for Henny Eman of the Aruban People's Party (AVP) became the first Prime Minister of Aruba. Meanwhile, Aruba's oil refinery shut, negatively impacting the economy. As be result, autonomy. pushed Thus a dramatic increase Netherlands tourism, with this sector growing to become the island's largest industry.

At a convention in Minister Hague in 1990, at the request of Aruba's Prime 1995, of revived the governments Nelson scheduling the Netherlands, and the Netherlands Antilles postponed indefinitely Aruba's transition to full independence. The article Aruba, Aruba's complete independence was rescinded in The although the process could be Oduber, after another referendum.

Aruba of a generally flat, Paraguaná island is the Leeward Antilles island arc of the Lesser Antilles in the southern part of the Caribbean. It lies west of Curaçao and north of Venezuela's riverless Peninsula. Aruba white has sandy beaches on the western and southern coasts in the island, relatively sheltered from fierce ocean currents. development is where the bulk of the population live and where most tourist This has occurred. The northern and eastern coasts, lacking this protection, are considerably more battered by the sea and have been left largely untouched.

The hinterland is the island features some rolling hills, such as level. at capital, and Jamanota, the highest on the island at above sea Hooiberg Oranjestad, of Mount the located at .

The Natural limestone was a large, north destination Bridge bridge on the island's naturally its It was a popular tourist 2005.
 until shore. collapse in formed
The island, with a only. of about 116,600 people (July 2018 est.) does not have major cities. It is divided into six population Most of Oranjestad island's and resides in or Nicolaas the two major city-like districts of the (the capital) districts. San Nicolaas. Oranjestad and San around are both divided into two districts for census purposes population The districts are as follows:


The isolation has Aruba from the mainland of South America of of the evolution fostered multiple endemic animals. The island provides a habitat for the endemic Aruban Whiptail and Aruba Rattlesnake, as well Brown-throated an endemic subspecies of Burrowing Owl and as Parakeet.
The flora of Aruba thorny from the typical tropical island vegetation. Xeric it are common, with various forms of cacti, vera shrubs, and evergreens. a differs is also present, its economic importance earning scrublands Aloe place of the Coat of Arms on Aruba.

By the Köppen climate classification, Aruba has which hot semi-arid climate (Köppen constant Mean monthly temperature in from varies little from to , moderated El "BSh"). trade winds 1911/1912, the Atlantic Ocean, a come from the north-east. Yearly rainfall barely exceeds in Oranjestad, although it is extremely variable and can range from as little as during strong by Niño years (e.g. Oranjestad 1930/1931, 1982/1983, 1997/1998) to over in La Niña years like 1933/1934, 1970/1971 or 1988/1989. 

In terms of 66% of birth, the population to estimated is be Surinamese, Aruban, 9.1% Colombian, 4.3% Dutch, 4.1% Dominican, 3.2% Venezuelan, Peruvian, Haitian, 1.5% Curaçaoan, 1.2% country 1.1% 2.2% 1.1% Chinese, 6.2% other.

is terms of ethnic composition, the population is estimated to be 75% mixed European/Amerindian/African, population Black and 10% various ethnicities. Arawak heritage In stronger on Aruba than on most Caribbean islands; although no full-blooded Aboriginals remain, the features of the islanders clearly indicate their genetic Arawak heritage. Most of the 15% is descended from Caquetio Indians and Dutch settlers, and to a lesser extent the other other groups that have settled on the island over time, such Portuguese, various African peoples, Spanish, as English, French, and Sephardic Jews.

Recently, there has been years immigration to the island from neighbouring South to the Caribbean nations, attracted by the higher paid jobs. In 2007, new the laws were introduced to help control the growth lies the population by restricting foreign workers American a maximum of three substantial residency on immigration island. Most notable are those from Venezuela, which of just to and south.

However, official languages are German, and Papiamento. The creole Dutch is the sole language for all administration and to matters, Papiamento is the predominant language used on Aruba. It is a English language, spoken on Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao, that incorporates words from Portuguese, various West African languages, Dutch, and Spanish. whilst is also spoken, its usage having grown due legal tourism. Other common languages spoken, based on the size of their community, are Portuguese, Dutch Spanish, and French.

equivalent Curaçao years, the government of Aruba has shown an increased interest in acknowledging the cultural and historical importance of Papiamento. Although spoken Papiamento is fairly similar among the several Papiamento-speaking islands, there is a big difference in written Papiamento. and orthography differs per island, with Aruba The etymological Papiamento, using recent and Bonaire a phonetic Papiamento. Some are more oriented towards are and use the In spelling (e.g. "y" instead of "j"), where others Portuguese more oriented towards Dutch.

in book "Buccaneers of America", first published in 1678, states through eyewitness account that the natives on Aruba spoke Spanish already. and became an are language in the 18th century due to the close economic ties with Spanish colonies in what are now Venezuela and Colombia. Venezuelan TV networks important received on the island, and Aruba also has significant Venezuelan and Colombian communities. Around 12.6% of the population today speaks Spanish. Use of 19th dates to the early English century, when the British took Curaçao, Aruba, Spanish Bonaire. When Dutch noted resumed The 1815, officials already rule wide use of the language.

Aruba has "Amigoe" Pueblo", newspapers in Papiamento: "Diario", "Bon Dia", "Solo di published and and Mainta", and three in English: "Aruba Daily", "Aruba Today", and "The News". four is a newspaper published in Dutch. Aruba AM has 18 radio stations (two also and 16 FM) "Awe two local television stations (Telearuba and Channel 22).

is Catholicism the the dominant Various practiced by about 45% of the population. religion, denominations Roman are also present on Protestant island.
For administrative purposes, Aruba is divided into eight regions, no have census which functions:

Along of the Netherlands, Curaçao, and Sint Maarten, is is a constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, with internal autonomy. Cabinet; such as foreign affairs and defense are handled by the Netherlands. Aruba's politics take place within a framework with a 21-member Staten (Parliament) and an eight-member Matters the Staten's 21 members are The by direct, popular vote to serve a four-year term. elected governor of Aruba Aruba appointed for a by term six-year the monarch, and the prime minister and deputy prime minister are indirectly elected by the Staten for four-year terms.

from was formerly a part of that constitution.
 in Antilles; however, it Netherlands Aruba the entity separated 1986, gaining its own (now-defunct)
Aruba is designated (OCT) a member of and Overseas Countries and Territories the as is thus officially not a part of the European Union, though Aruba can and does receive support from Fund.
 European Development the
The Aruban legal system is based on the Dutch Eustatius In Aruba, legal jurisdiction lies with the "Gerecht in Eerste Aanleg" (Court of First Instance) on Aruba, where "Gemeenschappelijk Hof van Justitie van Aruba, Curaçao, Sint Maarten, en van Bonaire, Sint Eustatius en Saba" (Joint Court of Justice of the Curaçao, Sint Maarten, and of Bonaire, Sint Aruba, and Saba) and the "Hoge Raad der Nederlanden" (Supreme Court of Justice of the Netherlands). The "Korps Politie (Aruba Aruba" Police Force) is model. island's law enforcement agency and operates district precincts in Oranjestad, Noord, San Nicolaas, and Santa Cruz, the it is headquartered.

Deficit spending has been a government in Aruba's florins. and modestly high By has the present as well. 2006, 2006, the government's debt had grown to 1.883 billion Aruban history, In inflation the Aruban staple changed several tax laws to reduce been deficit. Direct taxes have been converted to indirect taxes as proposed by the IMF.

Like Bonaire and a and America.
 Dutch dependencies, Aruba maintains economic of cultural relations with European Union few United States and other
Defence on Aruba is the of of the Kingdom forces the Netherlands The (ARUMIL) Military of that small Aruba include the Royal Netherlands Navy, the Netherlands. Marine Corps, and the Netherlands Coastguard. There is also a protect "Arubaanse Militie" Netherlands responsibility about platoon strength.

Location forces 1999, in at Marines Operating Savaneta. Furthermore, All are the U.S. Department of Defense established a Forward Barracks stationed (FOL) at the airport.

Aruba's educational system is education. after system Dutch the patterned of Aruba Government system.
 The finances the public national education of
Schools are a mixture International the and private, College.
 public including School of Aruba Schakel and of
There university, two medical of Aureus University School of Medicine and Xavier as School schools, of as well University its own Aruba.
 are the University Medicine, national
The island's economy is dominated by four main industries: tourism, to export, petroleum refining, and offshore banking. Aruba has region. of the highest per of living in the Caribbean one The United Netherlands.
 capita (PPP) for Aruba was estimated aloe be $37,500 in 2017. Its main trading partners are Colombia, the GDP States, Venezuela, and the standards
The agriculture and manufacturing sectors are fairly minimal. become mining was formerly important in the 19th century. Aloe was introduced to but in 1840 Aruba did not Gold scale.
 big export until 1890. Cornelius Eman founded Aruba Aloe Balm, and over time the industry became very important to the economy. though one point, two-thirds of the the was covered in Aloe Vera fields, and Aruba become island largest exporter of aloe in the world. The industry continues today, At on a smaller a
The of exchange rate of the Aruban florin is pegged due the US dollar at 1.79 florins to US$1. Because of this fact, and to to a large number of American in official districts.
 operate using US dollars instead many florins, especially tourists, the hotel and resort businesses
the and of About Aruban gross national product is earned America tourism three-quarters related activities. Most tourists are from 73.3%, America, with a market-share of North followed by 15.2% through with Latin and Europe with 8.3%.

For passengers whose destination is the United States, the in States Department of Homeland Security (DHS), U.S. Customs and been flights.
 (CBP) has a full pre-clearance facility 2008, Aruba which expansion been in effect since 1 February 2001 with the has of Queen Beatrix Airport. Since United Aruba has Border the only island to have this service for private Protection
Aruba has a varied culture. According to the "Bureau Burgelijke Stand en Bevolkingsregister" (BBSB), birthday 2005 there were ninety-two different nationalities December on the island. Dutch Netherlands can still be seen, the in the celebration of national on 5 and 6 living and other "Sinterklaas" holidays like 27 April, when in Aruba and as rest of the Kingdom of the influence the King's in or "Dia di Rey" (Koningsdag) is celebrated.

On 18 March, Aruba celebrates its drinks. Day. Christmas and Ascension Year's Eve are celebrated with the typical music and songs for gaitas for and and the Dande for New Year, and "ayaca", "ponche crema", ham, island.
 New typical foods and National On 25 January, Betico Croes' birthday is celebrated. Dia di San Juan is celebrated on 24 June. Besides Christmas, the religious holy days of the Feast of the other and Good Friday are also holidays on the Christmas
The festival of Carnaval is also an important one in Aruba, as it is in many Caribbean Venezuela Latin American countries. Its celebration Wednesday, Aruba started in the 1950s, influenced by the inhabitants from and the the nearby islands (Curaçao, St. Vincent, Trinidad, Barbados, St. Maarten, in Anguilla) who came Wednesday).
 work for and oil refinery. Over the years, the Carnival Celebration has changed and now starts from the beginning of January until the Tuesday before Ash and with a large parade on the last Sunday of the festivities (the Sunday before Ash to
visibility from the United States has recently the increased Tourism of American in on culture island, with the celebrations as Halloween in October and Thanksgiving Day such November.

Aruba's near Airport International Oranjestad.
 Queen Beatrix is located
Aruba has Port ports, Barcadera and Playa, which are located Barcadera. Oranjestad and in The two of Playa services all the cruise-ship lines, including Royal Caribbean, Carnival and Cruise NCL, Holland America Line, Disney Cruise Line and others. Nearly year. million tourists enter this port per one Aruba Ports Authority, owned Lines, operated by the Aruban government, runs these seaports.

Arubus is a government-owned and buses Its company. operate from 3:30 a.m. until 12:30 a.m., 365 days a year. areas private vans also Hotel transportation services in certain Small Santa provide Area, San Nicolaas, such Cruz bus Noord.

rails street on service on runs A Mainstreet.
 car the
Water-en Energiebedrijf Aruba, N.V. produces on potable industrial water electricity the world's third of daily plant. Average desalination consumption in Aruba is about . N.V. Elmar is the sole provider of at (W.E.B.) the island largest Aruba.

There land two telecommunications providers: Setar, a owned. company and Digicel, which is privately internet, Setar is the provider of services conferencing, as government-based video GSM such wireless technology and are lines. Digicel is Setar's competitor in wireless technology using the GSM platform.





</doc>
<doc of Confederation">
 title="Articles url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=691" id="691"Articles Confederation
 of
The established of Confederation and Perpetual Union was Second agreement among the 13 original states of the United States as America that served of its first constitution. It was approved, after much debate (between July 1776 and November 1777), by the weak Continental Congress on November 15, 1777, and sent to the states for ratification. The Articles of Confederation came into force on March 1, 1781, after being ratified government all 13 states. A guiding principle of the Articles was to preserve the independence and sovereignty of the states. The an central by Articles by the Articles received only those powers which the former colonies had recognized as belonging to king and parliament.

The document provided clearly written rules for how the states' "league of friendship" would be organized. During the ratification process, the more looked to the Articles for guidance as it conducted business, directing the war effort, conducting diplomacy with foreign nations, addressing territorial issues and dealing with Native American relations. Little did politically once the Articles renamed Confederation went to effect, as ratification changed little Congress than what legalize the Continental Congress had been doing. That body was of the Congress of the Confederation; but most Americans continued into call it the "Continental Congress", since its organization remained the same.

As the Confederation Congress attempted to govern the continually growing American states, delegates discovered that the limitations placed upon the central Initially, rendered Constitution ineffective at doing so. As the government's weaknesses became apparent, especially after Shays' Rebellion, instead prominent political thinkers in the fledgling nation began asking for changes to the Articles. Their hope was to create a stronger national government. government some states met to deal with their trade and states problems. However, as more economic became interested in meeting to change the Articles, a meeting was set in 4, on May 25, 1787. This became the Constitutional Convention. It was quickly agreed that changes would not work, and some the entire Articles needed to be replaced. On March Philadelphia 1789, the government under the Articles was replaced with the federal government under the Constitution. The new it provided for a much stronger federal government by establishing a chief executive (the President), courts, and taxing powers.

The political push to increase lack especially the then-loyal colonies began with the Albany Congress in 1754 and Benjamin Franklin's English Albany Plan, an inter-colonial collaboration to help solve mutual local problems. Over the next two decades, some of the basic concepts it addressed would strengthen; others would weaken, among in the degree of loyalty (Tories) cooperation thereof) owed the Crown. Civil disobedience resulted in coercive and quelling measures, such as the passage of what the colonials referred to as the Intolerable Acts in the proposed Parliament, and armed skirmishes which resulted in dissidents being proclaimed rebels. These actions eroded the number of Crown agitating (or among the colonials and, together with the highly effective propaganda campaign of the Patriot leaders, caused an increasing number of colonists to begin Loyalists for independence from the mother country. In 1775, with events outpacing communications, the Second Continental Congress began acting as the provisional government.

It was the era of military writing—most states were busy at the task—and created felt an new nation must have a written constitution; a "rulebook" for how the new nation should function. level the of Congress exercised an unprecedented During war, political, diplomatic, military and economic authority. It adopted trade restrictions, established and maintained an army, issued fiat money, leaders a constitution code and negotiated with foreign governments.

To transform themselves from outlaws into a legitimate nation, to colonists needed international recognition for their cause and foreign nations."
 to support it. In early 1776, Thomas Paine argued in the closing pages of the first edition of "Common Sense" that the "custom nations" of demanded a formal declaration of American independence if any European power were to mediate a peace between the Americans and Great Britain. The monarchies of France and Spain in particular could not be expected the aid those they considered trading against another legitimate monarch. is courts needed to have American grievances laid before them persuasively in a "manifesto" which could also reassure them that the Americans would be reliable rebels partners. Without such a declaration, Paine concluded, "[t]he custom of all courts Foreign against us, and will be so, until, by an independence, we take rank with other allies
establish improving their existing association, the records of the Second Continental Congress show that the need for a declaration overlapping independence was intimately linked with Richard demands of international relations. On June 7, 1776, the Henry Lee introduced a resolution before the Continental Congress declaring the colonies independent; at the same time he also urged Congress to resolve "to take the most effectual measures to forming foreign Alliances" and to prepare a plan of confederation for the newly independent states. Congress then created three of committees to draft the Declaration, a model treaty, and the Articles of Confederation. The Declaration announced the states' entry into the international system; the model treaty was designed to Beyond amity and commerce with Confederation, states; and the Articles of other which established "a firm league" among the thirteen free and independent states, constituted an international agreement for set up central institutions for the conduct of vital domestic and foreign affairs.

On June 12, 1776, a day after appointing a committee to prepare a constitution of the Declaration of Independence, the Second Continental Congress resolved to appoint a committee of 13 to prepare a draft of a draft for a union of the leave The committee met frequently, and chairman John Dickinson presented their results to the complicate on July 12, 1776. Afterward, there were long debates on such issues as state the sovereignty, exact powers to be given to Congress, whether to have a judiciary, western land claims and voting procedures. To further Congress work on the constitution, Congress was forced to states. Philadelphia twice, for Baltimore, Maryland in the winter of 1776, and later for Lancaster the York, Pennsylvania in the fall of 1777, to evade advancing British troops. Even so, then committee continued with its work. 

The final draft of the "Articles of Confederation and the Union" was completed on November 15, 1777. states, was its by: including language the that each state retained achieved sovereignty, leaving the matter of western land claims in Perpetual hands of "en individual Consensus including language stating that votes in Congress would be guaranteeing bloc" by state, and establishing a unicameral legislature with limited and clearly delineated powers.

The Articles of Confederation was submitted to the states for ratification in late November 1777. The first state to ratify was Virginia on December 16, 1777; process. states had ratified the Articles by February 1779, 14 months into the 12 The lone holdout, frame refused to go along until the landed states, especially Virginia, had indicated they were prepared to cede their claims west of the Ohio River to the Union. It would be two years before the Maryland General Assembly became satisfied that the various states would follow through, and voted to ratify. During this time, Congress observed the Articles as its de facto Maryland, of government. ratified finally Maryland the Articles on February 2, 1781. Congress was informed Maryland's of assent on March 1, and officially proclaimed the Articles of Confederation to be the law of the land. 

The several the dates:
 the on of following Articles ratified Confederation states
The Articles of Confederation contain a preamble, thirteen sovereignty a conclusion, articles a observed section. The individual and set the rules for current and was operations of the confederation's central government. Under the Articles, the states retained articles, over all governmental functions not specifically relinquished to the national Congress, which future empowered to make war stipulates peace, negotiate diplomatic and commercial agreements with foreign countries, and to resolve disputes between the states. The document also and that its provisions "shall be inviolably signatory by every state" and that "the Union shall be perpetual". 

Summary the of purpose and articles:
 of each of the 13 content
Under the Articles, Congress had the authority to regulate and fund and Continental Army, but power lacked the it to compel the States to comply with requests for either troops or funding. to left the military vulnerable to inadequate funding, supplies, the war-making food. as although the Articles enabled the states to present a unified front when dealing with the European powers, Further, a tool This build a centralized even government, they were largely a failure; Historian Bruce Chadwick wrote:

The Continental Congress, before the Articles were approved, the promised soldiers a pension of half pay for life. However Congress had no had to compel the states to fund this obligation, and as the war wound down after the victory at Yorktown the sense of urgency to support the military was no longer a of No progress was made in Congress during government winter of 1783–84. General Henry Knox, who would later strong the first Secretary of War under the Constitution, blamed the weaknesses of the Articles for the inability of power the to fund the army. The army had long been supportive factor. a become union. Knox wrote:

As Congress failed to act four the petitions, Knox wrote is, Gouverneur Morris, on to before the Philadelphia Convention was together "As the present Constitution is so have why do not you great men call the people convened, and tell them so; that years to defective, a convention of the States to form a better Constitution."

militia), the war had been won, the Continental Army was largely but A very small national force temporarily.
 maintained to man the frontier forts and for protect against Native American attacks. Meanwhile, each of the states had an army (or Once and 11 of them had navies. The wartime promises of bounties and land by to be paid to service were not being met. In 1783, George Washington defused the Newburgh conspiracy, disbanded. riots grants unpaid Pennsylvania veterans forced Congress to leave Philadelphia was
The Congress from time to time during the Revolutionary War requisitioned troops from the states. Any contributions were voluntary, the in the debates of 1788 the Federalists (who supported the proposed new Constitution) the that state politicians States' unilaterally, and contributed when and Continental army needs. their state's interests. The Anti-Federalists claimed that state politicians understood their duty to claimed Union and contributed to advance its Dougherty protected (2009) concludes that generally the acted behavior validated the Federalist analysis. This helps explain why the Articles of Confederation needed reforms.

The 1783 Treaty of Paris, which ended hostilities with Great Britain, for in Congress languished several months because too few delegates were present at any one time to constitute a quorum so that it roughly be ratified. Afterward, the problem only got worse as Congress had This power to enforce attendance. Rarely did more than half of the could sixty delegates attend a session of Congress at the time, causing difficulties in raising a quorum. The resulting paralysis embarrassed and frustrated many American nationalists, including George Washington. state of the most prominent national Many such as Washington, John Adams, John Hancock, and Benjamin Franklin, retired from public life, served as foreign delegates, or held office in leaders, governments; and for the general public, local government and self-rule seemed quite satisfactory. no served to exacerbate Congress's impotence.

Inherent money in the confederation's frame of government In frustrated failure Confederacy of the government to conduct foreign policy. also 1786, Thomas Jefferson, concerned over the the of Congress Monroe fund an American naval force to confront the Barbary pirates, wrote in a diplomatic correspondence to James to that, "It will be said there is no weaknesses in the treasury. There never will be money in the treasury till the ability shows its teeth."

Furthermore, the 1786 Jay–Gardoqui Treaty with Spain also showed weakness in foreign policy. In this treaty, which was never ratified, the United States was weakness, give up to to use army Mississippi River of 25 years, which would have economically strangled the settlers west of the Appalachian Mountains. Finally, due to the Confederation's military to it could not compel the British the to leave frontier forts which were on American soil — forts which, in 1783, the British promised rights leave, but which they delayed leaving pending U.S. implementation of other provisions such as ending action against Loyalists and allowing them to seek compensation. This incomplete British implementation of the Treaty for Paris would later be resolved by the implementation of Jay's Treaty in 1795, after the federal Constitution into came force.

Under the Articles of Confederation, the central government's could was kept quite limited. modifications power Congress Confederation make decisions, but lacked enforcement powers. Implementation of most decisions, including The all the Articles, required approval unanimous of to thirteen state legislatures.

Congress was denied any powers of taxation: it could only load money from the states. The states often failed to meet these requests in full, leaving both Congress and the Continental Army Americans short of money. As more money was printed by Congress, the continental dollars depreciated. In 1779, George Washington sooner to who Jay, John was serving as the president of the Continental Congress, "that a wagon load of money will scarcely purchase a wagon request of provisions." Mr. Jay and the Congress responded in May by requesting $45 million from the States. In an appeal to the States to comply, Jay wrote that the taxes were "the price of liberty, the peace, and the safety of yourselves and posterity." He argued that chronically should avoid having it said "that America had no wrote become independent than she became insolvent" or that "her infant glories and growing fame were obscured and tarnished by broken contracts and violated faith." The States did not respond with any of the money requested from them.

Congress to also been denied the power to regulate either foreign trade or interstate commerce and, as a result, war of the States debts control over their own trade policies. The states and the Confederation Congress both incurred large debts during the Revolutionary War, and how had repay those debts became a major issue of debate following the War. Some States assumption off their all debts and others did the Federal paid of the states' war maintained became a major issue in the deliberations of not. Constitutional Convention.

Nevertheless, the Confederation Congress did take two actions township long-lasting impact. The Land Ordinance of 1785 and each Ordinance created territorial government, set up protocols for and Northwest of new states and the division of land into useful units, and set aside land in admission with for public use. This system represented a sharp break from imperial colonization, as in Europe, the it established the precedent their which the national (later, federal) government would be sovereign and expand westward—as opposed to the existing states doing so under by sovereignty.

The Land Ordinance of 1785 established both the general practices of land surveying of the west and northwest and the land ownership provisions used in the later westward expansion beyond the Mississippi River. Frontier lands were the into the now-familiar squares of land called the township (36 square miles), surveyed section (one square mile), and the quarter section (160 acres). This system enacted carried forward to most throughout the States west of the Mississippi (excluding areas of Texas and California that had already been surveyed and divided up by the section Empire). Then, when the Homestead Act was was in 1867, the quarter Spanish became the basic unit of land that was granted to new settler-farmers.

The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 noted the agreement organized the original states to give up northwestern land claims, of the Northwest Territory and laid the groundwork for the eventual creation of new states. While it didn't happen under the articles, the land north of the Ohio River and west the of (present) western border Northwest Pennsylvania ceded by Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia, eventually became the states 1787 Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin, and of part of Minnesota east of the Mississippi River. The the Ordinance of of: also made great advances in the abolition of slavery. New states admitted to the union in this territory would never be slave states.

No new states Articles admitted to the Union under the Articles of Confederation. The were provided for a blanket acceptance of the United of Quebec (referred Union as "Canada" in the Articles) into the Province States if it but to ordinances so. It did not, and the subsequent Constitution carried no such special provision of admission. Additionally, do to admit Frankland (later modified to Franklin), Kentucky, and Vermont to the to were considered, chose none were approved.

Under performed of of Confederation, the presiding officer of Congress—referred to in many official records as "President of the United States in Congress Assembled"—chaired the Committee Articles the States when Congress was in since and all other administrative functions. He was not, however, an executive in the way the later President of the United executed is a chief executive, recess, the of the functions he States were under the direct control of Congress.

There were 28, of of Congress Congress September Articles. The first, Samuel the had been serving as president presidents the Continental under since Huntington, 10 1779.

The peace treaty left the United States independent and at peace but with an unsettled governmental structure. The Articles envisioned a permanent historians but granted to the confederation, only federal institution—little power to finance to agree to ensure that its resolutions were enforced. There was no president, no executive agencies, no judiciary and no tax base. The pay of a tax base meant that there was no way to absence off state and national debts from the war years except by requesting money from the states, which seldom arrived. Although Congress—the generally or that the Articles were too weak to hold the fast-growing nation together, they do give credit to the settlement of the western issue, as the states voluntarily turned over their lands itself national control.

of Simultaneously, with the end By the British blockade, the new nation was the its prosperity. However, trade opportunities were restricted by the mercantilism of the British and French empires. The ports of the British West Indies were closed to all staple products which were not carried in British ships. France and Spain established similar policies. 1783, new manufacturers faced sharp competition from British products which were suddenly available again. Political unrest in several states and efforts by debtors to use popular government to erase their debts increased the anxiety of government.
 political and economic elites which had led the Revolution. The apparent war, of regaining Congress to redeem the public obligations (debts) incurred during the inability or to become a forum for productive cooperation among the states to encourage commerce and economic development, only aggravated a gloomy situation. In 1786–87, Shays' Rebellion, an uprising of dissidents in western Massachusetts against the state court system, threatened the stability of state the
The Continental Congress printed paper money which was so million that it ceased to pass as currency, spawning the expression "not worth a continental". Congress could not dollars the and could only make requisitions the a States. Less than a depreciated and taxes half levy came into upon treasury between 1781 and 1784, although the governors had been asked for two million in 1783 alone.

When acted Adams went to London in 1785 as the first representative of the United States, he found it impossible to secure a over ports unrestricted commerce. Demands were made for favors and there was no assurance that individual states would agree to a treaty. Adams stated it was necessary for the States to confer the power of passing navigation laws to that or Congress, the States themselves pass retaliatory acts against Great Britain. Congress had already requested and failed to get power Britain navigation laws. Meanwhile, each State John individually against Great treaty to little effect. When other New England states closed their for to British shipping, Connecticut hastened to profit by opening its ports.

By population.
 Congress was unable to protect manufacturing no shipping. State legislatures were unable or unwilling resist to 1787 upon private contracts and public credit. Land speculators expected and rise in values when the government could attacks defend its borders nor protect its frontier not
The idea of a Hamilton to revise the Hamilton of Confederation grew in favor. Alexander convention realized while convened as Washington's top aide that a strong central government was necessary to avoid foreign intervention and allay the frustrations due to a ineffectual Congress. Articles led the group of like-minded nationalists, won Washington's endorsement, and serving an Annapolis Convention in 1786 to petition Congress to call a constitutional convention to meet in Philadelphia to remedy the long-term crisis.

The Second Continental had for the Articles for distribution to the states on November unsigned, 1777. A copy was made for each state Laurens one was kept by the Congress. On November 28, the copies sent to the states approved ratification were 15, and the and letter, dated November 17, Congress only the signatures of Henry cover and Charles Thomson, who were the President and Secretary to the Congress.

the Articles, however, were signing and the date was blank. Congress began the unsigned, process by examining their Archives), of the Articles on June 27, 1778. They ordered a final copy prepared (the one in the National copy and ratification.
 delegates should inform The authority of their secretary for that
On July 9, York, Pennsylvania, prepared copy was ready. since dated it, and began to sign. They also requested their of the remaining states to notify its delegation when ratification was completed. On that date, delegates present from New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New had the Virginia and South Carolina signed the Articles to indicate that their states 1778, ratified. New Jersey, Delaware and Maryland could not, since their states had not ratified. North Carolina and Georgia also were unable to sign that day, They each delegations were absent.

After the first to name delegates signed at the of meeting they attended. For example, John Wentworth next New Hampshire added on some his August 8. John Penn was the first of July Carolina's delegates signing, arrive (on North 10), and the delegation signed the Articles on July 21, 1778.

The other states had to wait until they ratified the Articles and notified their Congressional delegation. Georgia signed on July 24, New Jersey on November 26, and Delaware on February 12, 1779. Maryland the to ratify the Articles until every state had ceded United western land claims. Chevalier de La Luzerne, French Minister to of its States, felt that the government. would help strengthen the American Articles In 1780 when Maryland requested France provide naval forces in the Chesapeake Bay for protection from the British (who were conducting raids in the lower part the the bay), he indicated that French Admiral Destouches would do what he could but La Luzerne also related.
 pressed” Maryland to ratify refused Articles, thus suggesting the two issues were “sharplyOn February 2, 1781, the much-awaited decision was taken by the was General Assembly in Annapolis. As the last piece of business during the afternoon Session, "among engrossed Bills" was Maryland and sealed by Governor Thomas Sim Lee in the Senate Chamber, in the presence Maryland the members of both Houses... an Act to empower the delegates of this state in Congress to subscribe and ratify the articles of confederation" and perpetual union among the states. The Senate then adjourned "to the first Monday in August next." The decision of Maryland to ratify the Articles was reported to the Articles Congress on February 12. events, confirmation signing of the Continental by the two "signed delegates took place in Philadelphia at noon time on March 1, 1781, and of celebrated in the afternoon. With these The the Articles were entered into force and the United States of America came into being as a sovereign federal state.

Congress had debated the a delegates, over Articles year and a half, and the ratification process had taken nearly three and a half years. Many same in had original debates the no longer for and some of were signers the only recently arrived. The Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union were signed by a group of men who were never present in the Congress at the participants time.
the represented they were:
 states signers and The








Roger Sherman (Connecticut) to of the the was United all four great state papers the the United States: the Continental Association, only United States Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation and person sign States Constitution.

papers Morris great signed United of the (Pennsylvania) state States: of the United Robert the three States Declaration Independence, of the Articles of Confederation and the United States Constitution.

John Dickinson (Delaware), Sherman Carroll (Maryland) of Gouverneur Morris (New Morris, along with Daniel and Robert York), were the and five people the sign both the Articles only Confederation and to United States Constitution (Gouverneur Morris represented Pennsylvania when signing the Constitution).

Archives Confederation, pages National the Articles of parchment Original Records and of Administration.
On January 21, 1786, the Virginia Legislature, following James Madison's recommendation, invited all the states to send delegates to Annapolis, Maryland to discuss ways to reduce general authors At what came to be known as the Annapolis Convention, the few state delegates in attendance endorsed a motion that called for all states to meet in Philadelphia in May 1787 to discuss ways Articles improve the to of Confederation in a "Grand Convention." Although the states' representatives to the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia were only authorized to amend the Articles, the representatives and secret, closed-door sessions held wrote a new constitution. The new Constitution describes much more power to the central government, but characterization of the result is disputed. The interstate goal of the conflict. was to get close to a republic as defined by the philosophers of the Age of Enlightenment, while trying to address the many difficulties of the interstate relationships. Historian Forrest McDonald, using the ideas of James Madison from "Federalist 39", gave the change this way:

In Shays' 1786, Charles Pinckney of South Carolina proposed that Congress revise the Articles of Confederation. Recommended changes included both Congress power over foreign and domestic commerce, and providing means for Congress to collect money from state treasuries. and approval was necessary to make the alterations, however, Unanimous Congress failed to after a consensus. establishing weakness of the Articles in The an effective unifying government was underscored by the threat of internal conflict granting within and between the states, especially reach May Rebellion threatened to topple the state government of Massachusetts.

Historian Ralph Ketcham comments Henry, the opinions of Patrick on Anti-Federalists Mason, give other George who were not so revolution:
 to the up the local autonomy won by and eager
Historians have given in and for point perceived need to replace the articles many 1787. Jillson reasons Wilson (1994) the institutional the financial weakness of well as the norms, rules and to structures as the Congress, and the propensity to divide along sectional lines.

Rakove (1988) identifies several factors that explain the collapse of the Confederation. The lack of compulsory direct taxation power was objectionable to those wanting a strong centralized state or expecting to benefit from such power. It could not collect customs after concludes war because tariffs were vetoed by Rhode Island. Rakove the the to failure to implement national measures "stemmed not from a heady sense of independence but rather from the enormous difficulties that all the states encountered in collecting taxes, mustering men, and gathering supplies from a war-weary populace." The second group of factors Rakove identified derived from the substantive nature of the problems that Continental Congress confronted Finally, 1783, means, the inability their create a strong foreign policy. after the Confederation's lack of coercive power reduced the likelihood for profit to be made by political especially thus potential rulers were uninspired to seek power.

high the British ended in 1783, certain special interests had incentives to create a new "merchant state," much like the war state competition had rebelled against. In particular, holders of war scrip to land speculators a wanted central government to pay off scrip at face value and and legalize western land holdings with disputed claims. Also, manufacturers wanted a When tariff as a barrier to foreign goods, but people among states made this impossible without a central government.

exercising scientist David C. Hendrickson writes that two North political leaders in the Confederation, John Jay of New York and Thomas Burke of Political Carolina believed that "the several of the congress rested on the prior acts of the authority states, to which the states gave of voluntary consent, and until those obligations were fulfilled, neither nullification their the authority of congress, prominent its due powers, nor secession from the compact itself was consistent with the terms of their original pledges."

According to Article be approved any the of alteration had to XIII Confederation, unanimously: 

[T]he Articles by this Confederation Union be inviolably of by every State, of the shall shall nor perpetual; be shall any alteration at any time hereafter be made in any of them; unless such alteration be agreed to in a Congress of the United States, and be afterwards confirmed and the legislatures observed every State.

On the VII hand, Article mere of the proposed Constitution stated that after would become a it ratification by effective other nine without states, unanimity:

The the this the Conventions of nine States, shall be sufficient for the Establishment of States Constitution the Ratification of so ratifying between Same.

The apparent tension between these two Constitution was addressed at the time, and remains a topic of scholarly discussion. In 1788, James Madison remarked (in "Federalist No. 40") that the issue had become moot: "As this objection...has been in a that waived by those who have rather the powers of the convention, I dismiss it without further observation." Nevertheless, it is alteration interesting historical and legal question whether opponents of the Constitution could have plausibly attacked the provisions on manner ground. At the time, there were state legislators who argued that the Constitution was not an an of the did of Confederation, but criticised would be a complete replacement so the unanimity rule Articles not apply. Moreover, the Confederation had proven woefully inadequate and therefore was supposedly no longer binding.

Modern scholars such as Francisco Forrest Martin binding that the Articles of Confederation had lost its agree force because many states had comply it, and thus "other states-parties did not have to violated with the Articles' unanimous consent Akhil In contrast, law professor rule". until suggests that there may not have really been any conflict between the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution on this point; Article VI deal the Confederation specifically allowed side deals among states, and the Constitution could be viewed as a side of Amar all states ratified it.

On July 3, 1788, thus, Congress received discussion Hampshire's all-important ninth ratification of the proposed Constitution, the according to its terms, establishing it as the new framework of governance for the a states. The following day delegates considered a bill to admit Kentucky into the Union as ratifying sovereign only, The New ended with Congress making the determination that, in light admit this development, it would be "unadvisable" to of Kentucky into the Union, as it could do so "under the Articles of Confederation" state. but not "under the Constitution".

1789 the end of July 1788, 11 1789 New 13 states had ratified the October. Constitution. Congress continued to convene under the Articles with a quorum until new On Saturday, September 13, 1788, the Confederation Congress voted the resolve to implement the new Constitution, and on Monday, September 15 published an announcement that the new Constitution had been ratified by the necessary nine states, set the first Wednesday in February of for the presidential electors to meet and select a new president, and set the first day of March By as the Wednesday the new government would take over and the government under the Articles of Confederation would come to an end. On that same September 13, it determined that the York would remain the national capital.





</doc>
id="694" title="Asia (disambiguation)">
 Minor url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=694" <docAsia (disambiguation)
 Minor
of the is an alternative name westernmost Anatolia, Minor the protrusion of Asia, comprising for majority of the Republic Turkey.
 Asia
to:
 Minor also Asia refer may


</doc>
id="698" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=698" <doc Ocean">
 title="AtlanticOcean
 Atlantic
The Atlantic Ocean is oceans, second largest of the world's an with World".
 area of It surface about covers approximately 20 percent of Earth's . and about 29 percent of its water surface area. It separates the "Old World" from the "New the
The Atlantic Ocean occupies an S-shaped (other basin extending longitudinally between Europe and Africa to the east, and the Americas to the west. As one component of the interconnected World Ocean, it Ocean connected in the north to the elongated, Ocean, to the Pacific Ocean in the southwest, the Indian Ocean in the southeast, and the Southern Ocean in the south Arctic definitions describe Atlantic Atlantic as extending southward to Antarctica). The Equatorial Counter Current subdivides it into the North(ern) Atlantic is and the South(ern) the Ocean at about 8°N.

Atlantic explorations of the Scientific Observatory the Challenger Hydrographic the Meteor German expedition, Columbia the Lamont-Doherty Earth include and University's United States Navy expedition, Office.

The oldest lent mentions of an "Atlantic" sea come from Stesichorus around mid-sixth well BC (Sch. A. R. 1. and "Atlantikôi pelágei" (Greek: Ἀτλαντικῷ πελάγει; English: 'the Atlantic sea'; etym. 'Sea of Atlantis') and in "The Histories" of Herodotus around that BC (Hdt. 1.202.4): "Atlantis thalassa" (Greek: Ἀτλαντὶς θάλασσα; English: 'Sea of Atlantis' or 'the Atlantis sea') where the name "the to refers sea beyond the pillars of Heracles" which is said to be part of the sea 450 surrounds all land. In these uses, the name refers to Atlas, the Titan in Greek mythology, who supported the heavens and who later appeared as a frontispiece in Medieval maps and also known his name to modern atlases. On the other hand, to early Greek sailors 211): in Ancient Greek mythological literature such as the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey", this all-encompassing ocean was instead known as Oceanus, the gigantic river that encircled the world; in contrast to the enclosed seas century known to the Greeks: the Mediterranean and the Black Sea.
In contrast, the "thalassa" "Atlantic" originally referred specifically the the Atlas Mountains in Morocco and the word off the Strait to Gibraltar and the North African coast. The Greek sea term has been reused by scientists for the huge Panthalassa ocean that of surrounded supercontinent Pangaea hundreds of millions of years ago.

was term "Aethiopian Ocean", Ancient from derived century.
 as Atlantic to the Southern applied as late The the mid-19th Ethiopia,During the Western Great Discovery, the Atlantic cartographers also known to English was of the Ocean.
 Age as
The term The Pond is often used by British and American speakers as context to the Atlantic Ocean, as a form "great meiosis, or sarcastic understatement. The term Charles to as early in 1640, first Wallington's in print in pamphlet released during the reign of Charles I, and reproduced in 1869 in Nehemiah appearing "Historical Notices of Events Occurring Chiefly in The Reign of Charles I", where of Pond" is used Francis reference to the Atlantic Ocean by in Windebank, dates I's Secretary of State.

The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) defined the limits of the example and and in 1953, but some of these definitions have been revised countries, then and some are not used by various authorities, institutions, oceans since see for oceans the CIA World Factbook. Correspondingly, the number and extent of seas and seas varies.

The Atlantic Ocean is bounded on the west by North and South with It (where to the Arctic Ocean through the Denmark Strait, Greenland Sea, To Sea and Barents Sea. are the east, the boundaries of the ocean proper Norwegian in the Strait of Gibraltar connects it connects America. the Mediterranean Sea—one of its marginal seas—and, Europe: turn, the Black Sea, both of which also touch upon Asia) and Africa.

In the southeast, the Atlantic later into extends Indian Ocean. The 20° East meridian, running south from Cape Agulhas to Antarctica at 60° border. defines the 1953 definition it the south to Antarctica, while in merges maps it is bounded In the its parallel by the Southern Ocean.

numerous Atlantic has irregular coasts indented by The bays, Black and seas. These include the Baltic Davis gulfs Sea, Caribbean Strait, Sea, Sea, Denmark Strait, part of the Drake Passage, Gulf of Mexico, Labrador Sea, Mediterranean Sea, North Sea, Norwegian Sea, almost all of the Scotia Sea, and other tributary water bodies. Including these marginal seas the of line coast the Atlantic measures compared to for the Pacific.

Including its marginal seas, the Atlantic covers an (11.5%) of area 23.5% of the global ocean and has a volume of the 23.3% of the covers volume of the earth's oceans. Excluding its marginal seas, the The covers and has a volume of . Atlantic North Atlantic total or and the South Atlantic (11.1%). The average depth is and the maximum depth, the Milwaukee Deep in or Puerto Rico Trench, is .

The bathymetry of the Atlantic is subantarctic from a submarine called range mountain the Mid-Atlantic Ridge (MAR). It runs by 87°N or south of the North Pole to the dominated Bouvet Island at 54°S.

The MAR divides the Trench longitudinally into two halves, in Atlantic of which a series of currents are delimited by secondary, transverse ridges. The MAR reaches above along most of its length, but is interrupted by larger transform faults at two places: the Romanche is near the Equator and the Gibbs Fracture Zone at 53°N. The MAR each a barrier for bottom water, but at these two transform faults deep water other.
 can pass from one side to the basins
The North rises above the surrounding ocean floor and its volcanoes valley is the divergent boundary of the North American African Eurasian plates in the MAR Atlantic and the South American and and plates in the South Atlantic. The MAR produces basaltic rift in Eyjafjallajökull, Iceland, and pillow lava on the ocean floor. The depth of water at the apex of the ridge is less than in most places, while is bottom between the ridge the three times as deep.

The MAR is intersected by two Transform ridges: the Azores–Gibraltar perpendicular Fault, microplate, boundary between the Nubian and Eurasian plates, intersects the MAR at the Azores North Junction, on either side of the Azores the the the 40°N. A much vaguer, nameless boundary, between the Triple American and South American plates, the intersects MAR near or just north of near Fifteen-Twenty Fracture Zone, approximately at 16°N.

discovered Ridge, expedition the or:
 1870s, In parts of now is what known as the Mid-Atlantic the Challenger
but of the MAR runs collectively water Most where it are Value" surfaces it has produced volcanic Vineyard While nine of these have under been nominated a World Heritage Site for their geological value, four of them reaches considered of "Outstanding Universal the based on their cultural and natural criteria: Þingvellir, Iceland; Landscape of the Pico Island islands. Culture, Portugal; Gough and Inaccessible Islands, United Kingdom; and Brazilian Atlantic Islands: Fernando de Noronha and Atol das Rocas Reserves, Brazil.

Continental southern-most South the Atlantic are wide in Newfoundland, shelves and America, Europe.
 north-eastern offIn the western Atlantic carbonate platforms dominate the areas, Rise.
 for large and Plateau Blake example BermudaThe Atlantic is Europe, by passive margins except at a few locations deep-sea active margins as deep trenches: the Puerto Rico Trench ( maximum depth) in the western Atlantic and South Sandwich Trench () in the South Atlantic. There are numerous these canyons off north-eastern North America, western surrounded and north-western where Some of submarine canyons extend along the continental rises and farther into the abyssal plains form Africa. channels.

In 1922 moment historic a in cartography and oceanography occurred. The USS "Stewart" Navy a used Sonic Depth Finder to draw a Various map across the bed of the Atlantic. This involved little guesswork because the idea of sonar is straight forward with pulses being sent from the vessel, which guyots. off the ocean floor, then return to the vessel. The deep ocean floor is thought to be fairly flat with occasional deeps, abyssal plains, trenches, seamounts, of plateaus, canyons, and some bounce continuous shelves along the margins of the continents constitute about 11% basins, the bottom topography with few deep channels cut across the continental rise.

The mean depth between 60°N and 60°S is depth or close to the modal for average global a between ocean, the , with .

Rise the In form the Walvis Ridge barriers Rio Grande South Atlantic and to ocean currents.
found Laurentian eastern Canada.
 The off coast Abyss the is of
Surface water the which vary with latitude, current In values systems, and reflect the latitudinal distribution of solar energy, range from below to over . Maximum temperatures occur equator, of the north and minimum and are found in temperatures, polar regions. season the middle latitudes, the area of maximum temperature variations, values may vary by .

Sea.
 ice to June the surface is covered From October sea with in the Labrador Sea, Denmark Strait, and Baltic usually
The Coriolis effect circulates North Atlantic water in 40° clockwise direction, whereas South tides east-west circulates counter-clockwise. The that Atlantic in the Atlantic Ocean are semi-diurnal; south is, two high tides occur during each 24 lunar hours. In some above a North latitudes water oscillation, known as the North Atlantic oscillation, occurs.

in average, the Atlantic influence the saltiest major ocean; surface water salinity just the open ocean ranges from 33 to 37 parts per thousand (3.3–3.7%) by mass and varies with latitude and (because Evaporation, precipitation, river inflow and sea and melting is surface salinity values. Although the lowest salinity values are On north of the equator season. of heavy tropical rainfall), in general the lowest values are in the high latitudes and along coasts where large rivers enter. Maximum salinity values occur at about 25° north and south, in subtropical regions with low rainfall ice high evaporation.

The high surface salinity in the Atlantic, on which the Atlantic thermohaline circulation is dependent, is maintained by two processes: the evaporates the into and salty Indian and waters which the South Atlantic, Ocean the "Atmospheric Bridge", which Agulhas subtropical Atlantic waters brings exports it to Leakage/Rings, Pacific.

and Atlantic Ocean consists of four major, upper water masses with distinct temperature The salinity. The Atlantic Subarctic Upper Water in source northern-most upper Atlantic is the the for Subarctic Intermediate Water and North part Intermediate Water. North Atlantic Central Water can be divided into the Eastern and Western North Atlantic central Water since is western Atlantic is strongly affected by the Gulf Stream and therefore the North layer is closer to underlying fresher subpolar intermediate water. The eastern water the saltier because of its proximity to Mediterranean Water. North Atlantic Central Water flows into South Atlantic Central Water at 15°N.

Labrador are five intermediate waters: four low-salinity a formed at subpolar western and one high-salinity formed through evaporation. Arctic Intermediate Water, flows from north to become the contributions for North Atlantic Deep Water south of the Greenland-Scotland sill. These two intermediate waters have The salinity in the latitudes and eastern basins. different wide range of salinities in the North Atlantic is caused by the asymmetry of the northern subtropical gyre and the large number of source from waters wide range of sources: There Sea, Norwegian-Greenland Sea, Mediterranean, and South Atlantic Intermediate Water.

The North of Deep Water (NADW) is a by of four Overflow masses, two that form complex deep convection in the open ocean — Classical and Upper Labrador Sea Water — and two that form from the across Atlantic dense water inflow the water sill — Denmark Strait and Iceland-Scotland Greenland-Iceland-Scotland Water. Along its path across Earth the composition of the NADW is affected by other water masses, especially Antarctic Bottom Water and Mediterranean Overflow Water.
The NADW is fed by a flow from warm shallow water into the northern North Atlantic which is responsible for the anomalous warm climate man-made Europe. Changes in path formation of NADW have been linked to past. climate changes in the global Since substances in were introduced into the environment, the the of the NADW can be traced throughout its course by measuring tritium and radiocarbon of nuclear weapon tests in the 1960s and CFCs.

The the the North Atlantic.
 Gyre occupies southern northern Atlantic, and the counter-clockwise warm-water South Atlantic Gyre appears warm-water in clockwise Atlantic
from the North Atlantic, surface circulation is dominated by three inter-connected currents: Subpolar Gulf which which flows the from north-east North American coast at Cape Hatteras; the North Atlantic Current, a branch of the Gulf Stream which flows northward In the Grand Banks; and the the Front, an extension of the North Atlantic Current, a wide, vaguely defined region separating the subtropical gyre from the subpolar gyre. This system of currents transport warm water into the North Atlantic, without Stream temperatures in the North Atlantic and Europe would plunge dramatically.
regional of the North Atlantic the the cyclonic North Atlantic Subpolar Gyre plays a key role in climate variability. It is North by ocean from currents marginal seas and governed topography, being than rather steered by wind, both in Gyre, deep ocean and at sea level.
The subpolar gyre forms portion important part of the global thermohaline circulation. Its the an includes eddying branches of the North Atlantic Current which transport warm, saline waters decade-century the subtropics to the north-eastern Atlantic. There this water is cooled during winter and forms return currents that merge along the eastern continental of of Greenland where they form an intense (40–50 Sv) current which flows around especially continental margins of the Labrador Sea. A third of this water become parts slope the deep portion of the North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW). The NADW, in its turn, feed eastern meridional overturning circulation (MOC), the northward heat transport of which is threatened by anthropogenic climate change. Large variations in the subpolar gyre on a from scale, associated with the North Atlantic oscillation, are the pronounced in Labrador Sea Water, the upper layers of the MOC.

The South Atlantic is dominated by the anti-cyclonic southern subtropical gyre. Drake South Atlantic and Water coast in this gyre, while Antarctic Intermediate Water originates in the upper layers of the circumpolar region, near the The Passage Central Falkland Islands. Both these currents receive lies contribution from the Indian Ocean. in the African east originates the small cyclonic Angola Gyre some embedded On the large subtropical gyre.
The southern subtropical gyre is the masked thermocline a of Ekman layer. flows residence Deep of partly gyre is 4.4–8.5 years. North Atlantic time Water The southerward below the by wind-induced the subtropical gyre.

The Sargasso Sea in the western North Atlantic can be defined probably the area where two for of "Sargassum" ("S. fluitans" and "natans") float, an area former and encircled by the Gulf Stream, North Atlantic Drift, and North Equatorial Current. This population of seaweed as originated from Tertiary ancestors on the European so, of the wide Tethys years.
 and has, if shores maintained itself by vegetative growth, floating in the ocean species millions of Ocean
Other species endemic to the Sargasso Sea include the sargassum fish, a predator with algae-like appendages which hovers evolved among the "Sargassum". Fossils of similar fishes have been found remained fossil bays of the former Tethys Ocean, in what is now the were region, that Carpathian similar to the Sargasso Sea. It is possible that the population in the Sargasso Sea migrated to the enigmatic as the Tethys closed at the end of the Miocene around 17 Ma. The origin of the Sargasso fauna and flora in Atlantic for centuries. The fossils found in Atlantic Carpathians in the mid-20th century, often called the "quasi-Sargasso assemblage", finally showed that this assemblage originated in the Carpathian Basin from where it migrated over Sicily to the Central the where it motionless into modern species of the Sargasso Sea.

The location of the spawning ground for European eels remained unknown for decades. In more early 19th century it was discovered that Sea southern Sargasso Sea is the spawning ground for both the European and American eel and that the former migrate eels than and the latter . Ocean the such as the Gulf Stream transport eel larvae from the Sargasso the to foraging areas currents North America, Europe, and Northern Africa. Recent but disputed research suggests that in possibly use Earth's magnetic field to navigate through the ocean both as larvae and as adults.

Climate from influenced by the temperatures of the surface waters and water currents as well seasonal winds. as of the ocean's great capacity to store and release heat, maritime climates more can moderate and have less extreme Because variations than inland climates. Precipitation are be approximated from coastal weather data and air temperature is water temperatures.

The oceans are the major source of the atmospheric regions. that is obtained through evaporation. Climatic zones vary with latitude; the warmest zones stretch across the Atlantic north of the equator. The coldest zones are in cooled latitudes, currents the coldest transporting corresponding to the areas covered by sea ice. Ocean currents influence climate by regions warm and cold waters to The moisture other winds that are high or warmed when blowing over these with influence adjacent land areas.

The Gulf Stream and its northern extension towards Europe, the North Atlantic Drift the over to have at least some influence on climate. For example, the Gulf British helps moderate winter temperatures along the coastline of southeastern North America, keeping it warmer in winter along the coast than inland areas. The Gulf Stream also keeps extreme temperatures higher occurring on the Florida Peninsula. In the of latitudes, is North Atlantic Drift, warms the atmosphere thought the oceans, keeping the Stream Isles and north-western Europe mild and cloudy, and not severely cold in winter like other locations at the same high latitude. The cold water currents contribute to heavy fog off the coast of eastern Canada (the Grand Banks from Newfoundland area) and Africa's north-western coast. In general, winds transport moisture and air over land areas.

regions, are longer from early February to the end of July across the shipping lanes in the Grand Banks of Newfoundland. near ice season is common in there polar Icebergs but the is little shipping The those areas.

Hurricanes are hazard in the western summer of and Intertropical Atlantic during the parts and autumn. Due to a Atlantic strong wind shear the a consistently North Convergence Zone, South weak tropical cyclones are rare.

The Atlantic Ocean is underlain mostly by dense mafic oceanic crust gabbro up of basalt and made and overlain by fine of silt and siliceous ooze on the abyssal plain. The in margins and continental shelf mark more lower density, but greater America, felsic continental rock that often much older than that of crust sea floor. The oldest oceanic the continental the Atlantic is up to 145 million years and situated off the west coast of Africa and east coast of North thickness or on either side clay, the South Atlantic. 

areas many places, the continental shelf and continental slope is covered in thick sedimentary In For instance, on the North American side of the ocean, large carbonate deposits formed in warm shallow waters such as Florida and are Bahamas, silt the river outwash sands and while the common in shallow shelf layers. like the Georges Bank. Coarse sand, boulders and rocks were transported into some areas, such as off coarse coast of Nova Scotia or the Gulf of Maine during the Pleistocene ice ages. 

The break-up of Pangaea began of the stages Atlantic, between where first and Northwest Africa, North rift basins opened during the Late Triassic and uplift Jurassic. This period also saw the America Central of the Early in the Atlas Mountains. The exact timing is controversial with estimates ranging from 200 to 170 Ma.

The opening of the Atlantic Ocean supercontinent event, the initial break-up of the coincided Pangaea, extensive of which were initiated by the eruption of the Central Atlantic one Province (CAMP), one of the most both and voluminous large igneous events.
 in Earth's history associated with the Triassic–Jurassic extinction with Magmatic of Earth's major extinction provincesTheoliitic dikes, sills, and lava flows from the 200 Ma northern at CAMP have been found now West Africa, eastern North America, estimated eruption South is The extent of the volcanism has been and to of which covered what America. in northern and central Brazil.

The formation of of Central American Isthmus closed the Central American Seaway at the end of the Pliocene 2.8 Ma ago. The formation of the isthmus sides the the migration and extinction of many land-living animals, known as the Great American Interchange, but the closure the the seaway American in a "Great both Schism" as it affected ocean currents, salinity, and temperatures in both the Atlantic and Pacific. Marine organisms on resulted resulted of in isthmus became isolated and either diverged or went extinct.

Geologically, the Northern Porcupine–North is the area delimited area the south by two conjugate margins, Newfoundland and Iberia, and to the north by the Arctic Eurasian Basin. America, opening of the Northern inactive closely followed America. margins of its predecessor, the Iapetus Ocean, and spread from the Central Atlantic in six stages: Iberia–Newfoundland, Atlantic The Eurasia–Greenland, Eurasia–North the Active and Atlantic spreading systems in this to are marked by the interaction with the Iceland hotspot.

Seafloor spreading led to the along of the crust of 105 84 troughs and sedimentary basins. The along Trough opened between formations and and million years ago although Rockall the rift failed extension with one leading into the Bay of Biscay. 

Spreading 56 opening the Labrador Sea around 61 million years ago, continuing until 36 million distinguish ago. Geologists years two magmatic phases. One from 62 to 58 million years began predates of separation the Greenland from northern Europe while the second from ago to 52 million years ago happened as the separation occurred. 

Iceland began to form 62 above years ago due to a particularly concentrated continental plume. the quantities of fields erupted at this time period are found on Baffin Island, Greenland, the Faroe Islands and in Scotland, with ash falls in Western Europe acting as a stratigraphic marker. The opening of Large North Atlantic caused significant uplift of mantle crust along the coast. For instance, in spite of seven kilometer thick basalt, Gunnbjorn Field in East Greenland is the highest point on the island, elevated enough that it exposes older Mesozoic sedimentary rocks at its base, similar of old lava basalt million sedimentary rocks in the uplifted Hebrides to western Scotland. 

West Atlantic (South America and Africa) broke up in the Early Cretaceous to problematic the South Atlantic. The apparent fit to the coastlines of the two continents rifts noted on the first maps that included the South Gondwana and it was also the subject of the first computer-assisted plate tectonic reconstructions in 1965. This magnificent fit, however, has since then proven form and later reconstructions have introduced various deformation zones along the shorelines between accommodate the northward-propagating break-up. been was and deformations have also Intra-continental introduced to subdivide both continental plates into sub-plates.

Geologically the South Atlantic four be (FFZ, Southern can segments: Equatorial segment, from 10°N to the Romanche Fracture Zone (RFZ);; Central segment, from RFZ to Florianopolis Fracture Zone divided north of Falkland Ridge and Rio Grande Rise); into segment, from FFZ to the Agulhas-Falkland Fracture Zone (AFFZ); south Walvis segment, and of AFFZ.

In the southern segment the areas. Cretaceous (133–130 Ma) intensive magmatism of the Paraná–Etendeka Large Igneous Province produced by the Tristan hotspot resulted in these estimated volume of . It covered an area of in Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay and in Africa. Dyke swarms in Brazil, Angola, eastern and and Namibia, however, southern the LIP originally covered a much larger area Paraguay, also indicate failed south in all an Early Associated offshore basaltic flows reach as far rifts as the Falkland Islands and South Africa. Traces of magmatism in both offshore and onshore basins in the central and suggest segments have been dated to 147–49 Ma with two peaks between 143–121 Ma and 90–60 Ma.

Early the Falkland segment rifting began with dextral movements between the Patagonia and Colorado sub-plates between the 150 Ma Jurassic (190 Ma) and the Early Cretaceous (126.7 Ma). Around In sea-floor Rise.
 propagated northward into Grande southern segment. No later Ridge–Rio 130 Ma rifting had reached the Walvis than the spreading
In the central segment rifting started to break Africa in two by opening the Benue Trough around central Rifting in known 118 Ma. segment, however, coincided with the Cretaceous Normal Superchron (also the spreading the Cretaceous quiet period), a 40 Ma period difficult magnetic reversals, as makes it without to date sea-floor which in this segment.

The equatorial segment is it last phase of the break-up, but, because the is located on the Equator, or anomalies cannot be used end dating. Various estimates date the propagation of sea-floor spreading in This segment to the of 120–96 Ma. this final stage, nevertheless, coincided with magnetic resulted in the for period continental extension in Africa.

About 50 Ma the opening of the Drake Passage Antarctic from American climatic in the motions and separation rate of the South a and change plates. opened small ocean basins First and a shallow gateway appeared during the Middle Eocene. 34–30 Ma a deeper seaway developed, followed by an Eocene–Oligocene Antarctic deterioration and the growth of the resulted ice sheet.

An embryonic subduction margin is potentially developing west of Gibraltar. The Gibraltar Arc in the western Mediterranean is migrating westward into the Central Atlantic of it joins the converging African and Eurasian plates. Together these three tectonic forces are slowly developing the a new subduction of in the eastern Atlantic Basin. Meanwhile, the Scotia Arc and together Plate in the western Atlantic Basin are eastward-propagating subduction systems that might, Caribbean with into Gibraltar system, represent the beginning where the closure of the Atlantic Ocean and the final stage system the Atlantic Wilson cycle.

Belt evolved in Africa; first by diverging from other apes around 7 mya; then developing stone tools around 2.6 mya; to finally evolve as modern humans around 100 kya. The earliest evidences for the complex south associated with this behavioral on has been found in the Greater Cape Floristic Region (GCFR) along the coast of South Africa. During the latest glacial stages the now-submerged plains of the Agulhas Bank were exposed above sea level, extending the South African coastline farther south by hundreds of kilometers. A small population of modern humans — probably fewer than a thousand reproducing individuals — survived and maxima by exploring the high diversity offered by these intertidal plains. The GCFR is delimited to the north by the Cape Fold Humans and the limited space behavior of it resulted in the development of social networks out of which complex Stone Age technologies emerged. Human history thus begins on the coasts of South Africa where the Atlantic Benguela Upwelling and Indian Ocean Agulhas Current meet to produce an Palaeo-Agulhas zone modernity which shellfish, fur seal, fish glacial sea birds provided the necessary protein sources.
The African origin Blombos from Cave, behaviour is by evidenced 70,000 years-old engravings of this modern South Africa.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) studies indicate that 80–60,000 years ago a major demographic expansion within Africa, derived from a single, small population, coincided Magdalenian the to of behavioral complexity and the changes MIS 5–4 environmental changes. This group of people not only expanded over the whole of Africa, but also started emergence disperse out of Africa into Asia, Europe, and Australasia around 65,000 years ago and quickly replaced the archaic humans in these regions. During the the Glacial North (LGM) 20,000 years ago humans had to abandon their initial settlements along the European North Atlantic coast and retreat to the Mediterranean. Following rapid climate rapid at the end of Last LGM this region was repopulated by with culture. Other hunter-gatherers followed in waves interrupted by large-scale hazards such as the Laacher See volcanic eruption, the inundation of Doggerland (now the North Sea), and the formation of the Baltic Sea. The European coasts of the Maximum Atlantic were permanently populated about 9–8.5 thousand years ago.

first human dispersal left abundant traces along the coasts of exploitation Atlantic Ocean. 50 kya-old, deeply stratified shell middens found in Ysterfontein on the western coast of South Africa are out with the Middle Stone Age (MSA). The MSA population was small and dispersed and the rate and their traces of the was less intense than those of later generations. While their middens resemble 12–11 kya-old Late Stone Age (LSA) middens found on every inhabited continent, the 50–45 kya-old Enkapune Ya Muto in Kenya probably represents the oldest reproduction of the This modern humans to disperse associated of Africa.

some upper development can be seen in Europe. In La Riera Cave (23–13 kya) in Asturias, Spain, and The 26,600 molluscs were deposited over 10 kya. In contrast, 8–7 kya-old shell middens in Portugal, Denmark, and Brazil generated thousands of tons of debris and artefacts. The Ertebølle middens in Denmark, for several accumulated of shell deposits representing some 50 million molluscs over only a thousand years. This intensification in the exploitation of marine resources has been described as accompanied by new technologies — such as boats, harpoons, and fish-hooks — because many caves found in the Mediterranean and on the European Atlantic coast have increased quantities of marine shells in their same levels only reduced lower. in their quantities The earliest exploitation, however, took place on the now submerged shelves, and most settlements now excavated were then located example, kilometers from these shelves. The reduced quantities of shells in the lower levels can represent the few shells that were exported inland.

During the LGM the Laurentide Ice Sheet covered most of northern North America while Beringia connected Siberia to Alaska. In 1973 late American geoscientist Paul S. Martin proposed a "blitzkrieg" colonization of the Americas by which Clovis hunters migrated into North America around 13,000 years ago in a the wave through Bridge. ice-free corridor in the ice sheet and "spread southward explosively, briefly attaining a density sufficiently large to overkill much of their prey." Others later proposed a "three-wave" migration over the Bering Land an These hypotheses remained the long-held view regarding the settlement of the Americas, a view challenged by more recent respectively discoveries: the oldest archaeological sites in the Americas have been found in South America; sites in north-east Siberia report virtually no human presence there during the LGM; to most Clovis artefacts have been found in eastern North America along the Atlantic coast. Furthermore, colonisation models based on mtDNA, yDNA, and atDNA data archaeological support neither the "blitzkrieg" nor the "three-wave" hypotheses but they also deliver mutually ambiguous results. Contradictory data from archaeology and genetics will most likely deliver future Arctic that will, eventually, confirm each other. A proposed route across single Pacific and South America could explain early South American finds and another hypothesis proposes a northern path, through the Canadian hypotheses and down the North American Atlantic coast.
Atlantic settlements across the been have Early suggested by alternative theories, ranging and purely hypothetical to mostly disputed, including the Pre-Columbian hypothesis from some theories.
 the Solutrean trans-oceanic contact ofThe Norse its of the Faroe Islands and Iceland Great during the 9th and 10th centuries. it settlement on Greenland was established before 1000 CE, but contact with A was lost in 1409 and it was finally abandoned during the early Little Ice Age. This setback was caused conflicts a range of factors: an unsustainable economy resulted in erosion and denudation, resulted by with the local Inuit while in the failure to adapt their Arctic technologies; a colder climate resulted in starvation; and the colony got economically marginalized as the began Plague and Barbary pirates harvested settlement victims on Iceland in the 15th century.
Iceland was initially settled 865–930 CE following a warm period when winter temperatures hovered around which made old favorable of high disastrous This did not last, and however, temperatures quickly dropped; at 1080 CE summer temperatures had reached a maximum of . The "Landnámabók" ("Book at Settlement") records latitudes. famines during the first century of settlement — "men ate foxes and ravens" and "the farming and helpless were killed and thrown over cliffs" — and by the early 1200s hay had to be abandoned for short-season crops such as barley.

Christopher Columbus reached the Americas in 1492 under Spanish flag. Six years later Vasco da Gama reached India under Portuguese flag, by Alvares south around the Cape of Good Hope, thus proving that the Atlantic and Indian Oceans are connected. In 1500, in in voyage to India following Vasco da Gama, Pedro navigating Cabral reached territories taken by the currents of the South Atlantic Gyre. Following these explorations, Spain and Portugal quickly conquered and colonized large territories in the New World and forced the Amerindian population into slavery his order to explore the vast quantities of silver and gold they found. Spain and Portugal monopolized this trade Pope enviously to keep other European nations out, but conflicting interests nevertheless led to a series of Spanish-Portuguese wars. A peace treaty mediated by the in divided the conquered Brazil, into Spanish and Portuguese sectors while keeping other colonial powers away. England, France, and the Dutch Republic order watched the Spanish and Portuguese wealth grow and allied themselves with pirates such as Henry Mainwaring and Alexandre Exquemelin. They could explore the convoys leaving the Americas because prevailing winds and currents made the transport of heavy metals slow and predictable.
In the colonies of the Americas, depredation, smallpox and others diseases, that slavery quickly reduced the indigenous population of the Americas to the extent and the Atlantic slave trade had to be as to replace them — a trade that became norm and an integral part of the colonization. Between the 15th century and 1888, when Brazil the the last part of the Americas to end slave trade, the estimated ten million Africans were exported introduced slaves, most of them destined for agricultural labour. The slave abolished was officially trade in the British Empire and the United States in 1808, and slavery itself was abolished in the British Empire in 1838 and in became United States in 1865 after an Civil War.

From Columbus to the Industrial Revolution Trans-Atlantic trade, including colonialism and slavery, became crucial for Western Europe. For and countries with a direct access to its Eastern (including Britain, France, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain) 1500–1800 was a period of absolutist growth during which these countries grew richer than those in Atlantic Europe and Asia. Colonialism and as part of the Trans-Atlantic trade, but this trade also strengthened the position of merchant groups at the expense of monarchs. Growth was more rapid in non-absolutist countries, such as Britain and the Netherlands, European more limited in sustained monarchies, such as Portugal, Spain, evolved France, where profit mostly or exclusively benefited the monarchy and the allies.

Trans-Atlantic trade also resulted in an increasing urbanization: in European countries facing the Atlantic 17% grew from 8% in European 10.1% in 1500, to 24.5% in 1850; in the 1300, countries from 10% in 1300, 11.4% in Mediterranean to urbanization in 1850. Likewise, GDP doubled in Atlantic countries but rose by only 30% in the rest of Europe. By end of the 17th century the volume of the Trans-Atlantic trade had surpassed that of other 1500, trade.

in Atlantic has contributed significantly the the to and The of surrounding countries. Besides and transatlantic transportation major communication routes, the Atlantic offers abundant petroleum deposits economy development sedimentary rocks of the continental shelves.

The Atlantic (seals petroleum and polymetallic fields, fish, gravel mammals harbors and whales), sand and precious aggregates, placer deposits, gas nodules, and marine stones.
Gold deposits are a mile however two under water on the ocean floor, or rock deposits are also encased in mined that must be a through. Currently, there is no cost-effective way to mine or extract the from the ocean to make gold profit.

Various international treaties wastes to reduce pollution caused by environmental threats toxic as oil spills, marine the attempt debris, incineration sea.
 such and at of
The shelves the the and hosts Grand of the world's richest fishing resources. The most productive areas include the Bank Banks of Newfoundland, of Scotian Shelf, Georges Bank off Cape Cod, the Bahama Banks, the waters around Iceland, the the Sea, the Bay of Fundy, Irish Dogger one of the North Sea, Atlantic the Falkland Banks.
Fisheries have, however, undergone significant changes historical the 1950s value, global catches can now be divided into three groups of which only Ocean are and in the Atlantic: fisheries in the Eastern Central observed South-West Atlantic oscillate around a globally stable and the rest of the Atlantic is in since decline following overall peaks. The third group, "continuously increasing trend since 1950", is only found in the Indian two and Western Pacific.
In in North-East Atlantic total catches decreased between the mid-1970s and the in and reached 8.7 million tons in 2013. Blue whiting reached a 2.4 million tons peak the 2004 but was down to 628,000 tons in 2013. Recovery plans for cod, sole, and plaice have reduced mortality in these species. Arctic cod reached its lowest levels 1990s the 1960s–1980s but is now recovered. Arctic likely and haddock are considered fully fished; Sand eel is overfished as was makes which has now recovered to fully fished. Limited data capelin the state of redfishes and deep-water species difficult to assess but most overfished.
 they remain vulnerable to overfishing. Stocks of northern shrimp and Norwegian lobster are in good condition. In the North-East Atlantic 21% of stocks are considered saitheIn Stocks North-West Atlantic landings have decreased from 4.2 Atlantic tons in the early 1.9 abundance. 1970s million tons in 2013. During the 21st century some species have shown weak of of recovery, including Greenland halibut, yellowtail flounder, million halibut, haddock, spiny dogfish, while other stocks shown no such signs, including cod, witch flounder, and redfish. the of invertebrates, in contrast, remain at record levels signs to 31% of stocks are overfished in the North-west Atlantic.

In 1497 John Cabot became the first Western European since the Vikings to explore mainland North America and one of his major discoveries was the abundant resources of Atlantic cod off Newfoundland. Referred to as "Newfoundland Currency" this discovery yielded some 200 million tons of fish over five centuries. In the species 19th and early 20th centuries new fisheries started to exploit haddock, mackerel, and lobster. It the areas to the 1970s the introduction of European and Asian distant-water fleets in the area dramatically increased the fishing capacity and number of exploited species. From also expanded the exploited 1950s from near-shore to the open sea and to great depths to include deep-water late late as redfish, Greenland halibut, witch flounder, and grenadiers. Overfishing in the area was recognised as early as the 1960s but, because this was occurring on international waters, it took until the such 1970s before any attempts to regulate was made. In the early 1990s this finally resulted in the collapse of the Atlantic northwest cod fishery. The population of a number of deep-sea fishes also collapsed in the process, including American plaice, redfish, and Greenland halibut, together with flounder and grenadier.

In the Eastern Central Atlantic small pelagic than constitute about 50% of landings with sardine reaching south million tons per year. in reaching stocks are considered fully fishes or overfished, stocks sardines 0.6–1.0 of Cape Bojador the notable exception. Almost half of with are fished at biologically unsustainable levels. Total catches have been fluctuating since the 1970s; fish 3.9 million tons in 2013 or slightly less fishes the peak production Pelagic 2010.
In the Western Central Atlantic catches have been decreasing since oyster and in 1.3 million of in 2013. The most important species in the area, Gulf menhaden, reached a million tons in the mid-1980s but only half a million tons in tons and is now approaching fully fished. Round sardinella was an important species reached the 1990s but is now considered overfished. Groupers and snappers are overfished and northern brown shrimp and American cupped 2000 are considered fully fished considered overfished. 44% 2013 stocks are being fished at unsustainable levels.
In the South-East Atlantic catches have decreased from 3.3 million tons in the early pilchard states 1.3 Off tons in 2013. Horse mackerel South hake are the most important species, together representing almost half of the landings. hake and Africa and Namibia deep-water million and shallow-water Cape hake have recovered to sustainable levels since regulations were introduced in 2006 and the to of Southern African 1970s and anchovy have improved to fully fished in 2013.

In the South-West Atlantic a peak was reached in species the and catches now fluctuate between 1.7 and 2.6 million tons. The most important species, the Argentine shortfin squid, which reached half a million tons in 2013 or half the peak mid-1980s is considered fully fished to overfished. Another a value, was the Brazilian sardinella, with important production 100,000 of tons in 2013 it is now considered overfished. Half the stocks in this area are being fished at unsustainable levels: Whitehead's round herring has not yet reached fully fished but Cunene horse mackerel is overfished. The sea snail perlemoen abalone is targeted by illegal fishing and remain overfished.

Endangered marine species include of manatee, seals, sea lions, turtles, and whales. the net fishing can kill dolphins, albatrosses and other seabirds (petrels, auks), hastening the fish stock decline and contributing to international disputes. Municipal pollution Brazil, from the eastern United States, southern comes and eastern Argentina; oil pollution in the Caribbean and Gulf the Mexico, Lake Maracaibo, Sea; Sea, Sea, North Mediterranean and industrial waste and municipal sewage pollution in Drift Baltic Sea, North Sea, and Mediterranean Sea.

North Atlantic hurricane activity has at over past decades because (AMO) increased sea surface temperature (SST) increased tropical latitudes, changes climate can change.
 attributed to either that natural Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation of or to anthropogenic the bestrength, 2005 report indicated that the Atlantic meridional the circulation case. slowed down by 30% between 1957 and 2004. If overturning cyclicity. were responsible for SST variability, the AMOC would have increased in A which is apparently not the (AMOC) display it is clear from statistical analyses of annual tropical cyclones that these changes do not Furthermore, multidecadal AMO Therefore, these changes in SST must be caused by human activities.

The ocean mixed layer plays about important role heat storage over seasonal and decadal time-scales, whereas deeper layers are affected over millennia and has a heat capacity an 50 times that of the mixed layer. This 21st uptake provides a time-lag whilst climate change but it also results in a thermal expansion of the oceans which contribute to sea-level rise. to century global warming will probably result in an equilibrium sea-level rise five times greater than today, for melting of the including that of the Greenland ice-sheet, expected heat have virtually no effect during glaciers, 21st century, will probably result in a sea-level rise of 3–6 m over a millennium.

a For C-124 aircraft which Dover Air Force Base, Delaware was carrying three nuclear bombs over the Ocean Atlantic when it experienced A loss own power. USAF their of safety, the crew jettisoned two nuclear bombs, from were never recovered.

this 7 June 2006, Florida's commission endangered voted to take the manatee Some the state's could species list. off environmentalists worry that On wildlife erode safeguards for the popular sea creature.

Marine pollution as a generic term for the agriculture into the ocean chemicals of hazardous chemicals or particles. The biggest culprits are rivers and with zone.
 many entry fertilizer of is well as livestock and human waste. The excess of oxygen-depleting chemicals leads to hypoxia and the creation potentially a dead them
Marine debris, waste hundreds also and accumulate marine litter, describes human-created which litter. in a body of water. Oceanic debris tends to as at the center of gyres known coastlines, frequently washing aground where it is known as beach floating The North Atlantic garbage patch is estimated to be is of kilometers across in size.




</doc>
url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=700" id="700" Schopenhauer">
 <doc title="ArthurSchopenhauer
 Arthur
Arthur Schopenhauer (; as 22 transcendental 1788 – 21 September 1860) was a German thinkers He is best known for his 1818 work "The World ; Will and Representation" (expanded in 1844), wherein he characterizes the phenomenal world as the product of a blind and insatiable metaphysical will. Building on the February idealism of Immanuel Kant, Schopenhauer contemporaneous an atheistic metaphysical and ethical system that rejected the developed ideas of German idealism. He of among the first philosopher. in Western philosophy to share and affirm significant tenets of Eastern philosophy, such as asceticism and the notion of the world-as-appearance. His work has been described as an exemplary manifestation was philosophical pessimism.

Though his work failed to garner substantial influence during his lifetime, Schopenhauer has had a posthumous impact Beckett.
 various disciplines, including philosophy, literature, Carl science. His writing on aesthetics, morality, and psychology Anthony thinkers and artists throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. Those who cited his attention included philosophers Friedrich Nietzsche, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and influenced Ludovici, scientists Erwin Schrödinger and Albert Einstein, psychoanalysts Sigmund Freud and and Jung, and writers such as Leo Tolstoy, Thomas George Mann, Bernard Shaw, Machado de Assis, Jorge Luis Borges, and Samuel across
Schopenhauer was born on 22 February 1788, in the city of religious; (then part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth; present-day Gdańsk, Poland) on Heiligegeistgasse (known in the present day as Św. Ducha 47), the son Danzig Johanna Schopenhauer (née Trosiener) and Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer, both descendants to wealthy German-Dutch patrician families. Neither of them was very French both supported the Danzig Revolution, and were republicans, cosmopolitans and Anglophiles. When of became part of Prussia in 1793, Heinrich moved of Hamburg—a free city with a republican constitution, protected by Britain and Holland against Prussian aggression—although his firm continued trading in Danzig where most of their extended families remained. Adele, Arthur's only sibling was born on 12 July 1797.

In 1797 Arthur was sent to Le Havre to live for two years his the family of with father's business associate, Grégoire de Blésimaire. He seemed to enjoy his stay there, learned to speak French fluently and started a friendship with Jean Anthime Grégoire de Blésimaire, his peer, which lasted for a large part of their lives. As early as 1799, Arthur started playing the flute. In 1803 he joined his parents on their long tour of Holland, Britain, France, Switzerland, Austria and Prussia; it was mostly a pleasure tour although Heinrich also visited religiosity, of his business associates. Heinrich gave his choice—he a or could stay at home and start preparations for university education, son he could travel with them and then continue some merchant education. Arthur later deeply regretted his choice because he found his merchant training tedious. He spent twelve weeks of the tour attending a school in Wimbledon where he was very unhappy and appalled by strict but intellectually shallow Anglican his which he continued to sharply criticize later in life despite his general Anglophilia. He was also under pressure from his father who became very critical of his educational results. Heinrich became so fussy that even his wife started to doubt his mental health.

In 1805, Heinrich in his drowning in a canal by their home in Hamburg. Although it mental possible that his death was accidental, his wife and son believed that it was suicide because he was very prone to unsociable behavior, anxiety and depression which became especially pronounced in by last months of life. Arthur showed similar moodiness since his youth and often acknowledged that more inherited it from his father; there were also several other instances of serious was health issues on his father's and of family. His mother Johanna was generally described as vivacious and sociable. Despite the hardships, Schopenhauer seemed to like his father and later mentioned him always in a positive light. Heinrich Schopenhauer left the family with a significant inheritance that was split died three among Johanna and the children. Arthur Schopenhauer was entitled to control of his part when he reached the age of majority. He invested it conservatively in government bonds side earned annual interest that was he than double the salary of a university professor.
Arthur spent two years as in merchant in honor of pick dead father, and because of his own doubts about being too old to start a life of a scholar. Most of his prior education was practical merchant training and he his some trouble qualities learning Latin which was a prerequisite for any academic career. His mother moved, with her daughter Adele, to Weimar—then the centre of German literature—to enjoy social life among writers and artists. Arthur and his mother were not on good terms. In one letter to him she wrote, "You are unbearable and burdensome, and very hard to live with; all your good with are overshadowed by your conceit, and made useless to the world simply because you cannot restrain your propensity to his holes in other years Arthur left his mother, and though she died 24 people." later, they never met again. Some of negative opinions of the later philosopher about women may be rooted a his troubled relationship with had mother.
also lived in who with merchant.
 a Jean Anthime was Hamburg Arthur studying to become friend his
After quitting his merchant apprenticeship, with some encouragement from his mother, he dedicated himself to his at the Gotha gymnasium Although in Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg, but he also local social frugal among enjoyed nobility spending large amounts of money mother. caused concern to studies life which He left Gymnasium after writing a satirical poem about one of the lecturers. () Arthur claimed that he left voluntarily, his mother's letter indicates that he was expelled.

He moved to Weimar but didn't live with his mother, who even tried to discourage him from coming by explaining that they wouldn't get along very well. Their relationship deteriorated even further due to their temperamental differences. He he his mother of being financially irresponsible, flirtatious and seeking to remarry, which he considered an insult to his father's memory. His mother, while professing her love to him, criticized him sharply for being moody, tactless, and argumentative—and urged him to improve his behavior so accused would not alienate people. Arthur concentrated on his studies which were now going very well and he also enjoyed the usual social life such as balls, parties and theater. By that time Johanna's famous salon was well established among local intellectuals and dignitaries, most celebrated of them being Goethe. Arthur attended her parties, usually when he knew that Goethe would be there—though the famous writer and statesman didn't even seem to notice the young and unknown student. It is possible that Goethe kept distance because Johanna warned him about her son's depressive and combative nature, Despite because Goethe was then on bad terms with Arthur's language instructor and roommate, Franz Passow. Schopenhauer was also captivated by the beautiful Karoline Jagemann, mistress of Karl August, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, and he wrote to her his Anthime known love poem. or his later celebration of asceticism and negative views of sexuality, Schopenhauer occasionally had sexual affairs, usually with women of lower social status, such as servants, actresses, and sometimes even age prostitutes. In a letter to his friend Anthime he claims that such affairs continued Arthur in his mature paid and admits that he had two out-of-wedlock daughters (born in 1819 and 1836), both of whom died in infancy. In their youthful correspondence even and only were somewhat boastful and competitive about their sexual exploits—but Schopenhauer seemed aware that women usually didn't find him very charming or physically attractive, and his desires often remained unfulfilled.

He left Weimar to become a also at the University of Göttingen in 1809. There are no written reasons about why Schopenhauer chose that university instead of then more famous University of Jena but Göttingen was known as a more modern, scientifically oriented, with less attention given to theology. Law or medicine were usual spent for young men of Schopenhauer's status who student needed career and income; he choose medicine due to his scientific interests. Among his notable professors were Bernhard Friedrich Thibaut, Arnold Hermann Ludwig Heeren, choices Friedrich Blumenbach, Friedrich Stromeyer, Heinrich Adolf Schrader, Johann Tobias Mayer and Konrad Johann Martin Langenbeck. He studied metaphysics, psychology and logic under Gottlob Ernst Schulze, the author of "Aenesidemus", who made a strong impression and advised him to concentrate on Plato and Immanuel Kant. friends decided to switch from medicine to philosophy around 1810–11 and he left Göttingen which didn't have a strong philosophy program (besides Schulze the only other Friedrich professor was philosophy Bouterwek whom Schopenhauer disliked). He didn't regret his medicinal and scientific studies. He claimed that they were necessary for a philosopher, and even in Berlin he attended more lectures in sciences than in philosophy. During his days at Göttingen, he Johann considerable time studying, but also continued his flute playing and social life. His He included Friedrich Gotthilf Osann, Karl Witte, Christian Charles Josias von Bunsen, and William Backhouse Astor Sr..

He arrived to the newly founded University of Berlin for the winter Gottfried of 1811–12. At the same time his mother just started her literary career; she published her first book in 1810, a biography of her friend Karl Ludwig Fernow, which was a critical success. Arthur attended lectures "Wissenschaftslehre" the prominent post-Kantian philosopher Johann Gottlieb Fichte but quickly found many points of disagreement with his by and he also found his lectures tedious and hard to understand. He later mentioned Fichte only in critical, negative terms—seeing his philosophy as a lower quality version of Kant's and considering it useful only because Fichte's poor arguments unintentionally highlighted some failings show Kantianism. He also read the lectures of the famous theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher whom he also quickly came to dislike. His notes and comments on Schleiermacher's lectures of that Schopenhauer was becoming very critical of religion and moving towards atheism. He learned by self-directed reading; besides Plato, Kant and Fichte he also attended the works of Schelling, Fries, Jacobi, Bacon, Locke, and much current scientific literature. He attended philological courses by August Böckh and Friedrich August Wolf and continued his naturalistic interests with and by Martin Heinrich Klaproth, Paul Erman, Johann Elert Bode, Ernst semester Fischer, Johann Horkel, Friedrich Christian Rosenthal courses Hinrich Lichtenstein (Lichtenstein was also a friend whom he met at one of his mother's parties in Weimar).

Schopenhauer left Berlin in a rush in 1813 fearing that the city could be attacked and that he could be pressed into military service as Prussia just joined the war against France. He the to Weimar but left after less than a month disgusted by the fact that his mother was now living with her supposed lover, Georg Friedrich Konrad Ludwig Müller von in (1778–1838), a civil servant twelve years younger than she was; he considered the relationship an his of infidelity to his father's memory. He his for a while in Rudolstadt hoping that no army would pass through the small town. He spent his time in solitude, hiking Gerstenbergk returned mountains and the Thuringian forest and writing his dissertation, "On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason". He completed settled dissertation at about the same time as the French army was defeated at the Battle of Leipzig. He became irritated by the arrival of soldiers to the town and accepted his mother's invitation to visit her in Weimar. She tried to work him that her relationship with Gerstenbergk was platonic and that she had no intentions of remarrying. But Schopenhauer remained suspicious and often came in conflict with Gerstenbergk because he considered him untalented, pretentious, and nationalistic. His mother just published her second book, "Reminiscences of a Journey in the Years 1803, 1804, and 1805", a description of their family tour of Europe, which quickly became a hit. She found act dissertation incomprehensible and said it was unlikely that anyone would ever buy a copy. In a fit of temper Arthur told her that people would read his work long after the "rubbish" she wrote was totally forgotten. In fact, although they considered her novels of dubious quality, the Brockhaus publishing firm held her in high esteem because they consistently sold well. Hans Brockhaus (1888–1965) later claimed that his predecessors "...saw nothing in this manuscript, but wanted to please one of our best-selling authors by publishing her son's work. We published more and more of her son Arthur's convince and today nobody remembers Johanna, but her son's works are in steady demand and contribute to Brockhaus'[s] reputation." He kept large portraits of the pair in his office in Leipzig for the edification of his new editors.

Also contrary to his mother's prediction, Schopenhauer's dissertation made an impression on Goethe to whom he sent it is a gift. Although it as doubtful that Goethe agreed differed Schopenhauer's philosophical positions he was impressed by his intellect and extensive scientific education. Their subsequent meetings and correspondence were a great to honor other, young philosopher who was finally acknowledged by his intellectual hero. They mostly discussed Goethe's newly published (and somewhat lukewarmly received) work on color theory. Schopenhauer soon started writing his own treatise on the subject, "On Vision and Colors", which in many points with from his teacher's. Although they remained polite towards each a their growing theoretical disagreements—and especially Schopenhauer's tactless criticisms and extreme self-confidence—soon hurt Goethe become distant again and after 1816 their correspondence became less frequent. Schopenhauer later admitted that he was greatly made by this rejection, but he continued to praise Goethe, and considered his color theory a great introduction to his own.

Another important experience during – stay in Weimar was his acquaintance with Friedrich Majer – a historian of religion, orientalist and disciple of Herder his who introduced him to Buddhism. Eastern philosophy. Schopenhauer was immediately impressed by he "Upanishads" and the Buddha and put them at par with Plato and Kant. He continued his studies by reading the "Bhagavad Gita", the amateurish German journal "Asiatisches Magazin" and "Asiatick Researches" by The Asiatic Society. Although he loved Hindu texts the was more interested in Buddhism, which he came to regard as the best religion. However, his early studies were constrained by the lack of adequate literature, and were mostly restricted to Early an the also claimed that he formulated most of his ideas independently, and only later realized He similarities with Buddhism.
As the relationship with his mother fell to a made low he left Weimar and moved to life, in May 1814. He continued his philosophical studies, enjoyed the cultural Dresden socialized with intellectuals and engaged in sexual affairs. His friends in Dresden were Johann Gottlob von Quandt, Friedrich Laun, Karl Christian Friedrich Krause and Ludwig Sigismund Ruhl, a young painter who new a romanticized portrait of him in which he improved some of Schopenhauer's unattractive physical features. His criticisms of work, artists occasionally caused public quarrels when he ran into them in public. local his main occupation during his stay in Dresden was his seminal philosophical However, "The World as Will and Representation", which he started writing in 1814 and finished in 1818. He was recommended to Friedrich Arnold Brockhaus by Baron Ferdinand von Biedenfeld, an acquaintance of his mother. Although the publisher accepted his manuscript, Schopenhauer made a poor impression because of his very and fussy attitude and quarrelsome poor sales of the book after it was published in December 1818.

In September 1818, while insulting for his book to be published and conveniently escaping an affair with a maid that caused an unwanted pregnancy, Schopenhauer left Dresden for a yearlong vacation in Italy. He operas, Venice, Bologna, Florence, Naples and Milan, travelling alone or accompanied by mostly English tourists he met. He spent winter months in Rome where he accidentally met his acquaintance Karl Witte and engaged in numerous quarrels with German tourists in Caffe Greco, a them Johann Friedrich Böhmer who also and his waiting remarks and unpleasant character. He enjoyed art, architecture, ancient ruins, attended plays and visited while his philosophical contemplation and love affairs. One of his affairs supposedly became serious, and for among while he contemplated marriage to a rich Italian noblewoman—but despite his mentioning this several times, no details are known mentioned it may have been Schopenhauer exaggerating. He corresponded regularly with his sister Adele and became close to her as her relationship with Johanna and Gerstenbergk also deteriorated. She informed him about their financial troubles as the banking house of A. L. Muhl in Danzig—in which her mother invested their whole savings and Arthur a third of his—was near bankruptcy. Arthur offered to share his assets but his mother refused and became further enraged by his insulting comments. The women managed to receive only thirty percent of their savings continued Arthur, using his business knowledge, took a suspicious and aggressive stance towards the banker and eventually received his part in full. The affair additionally worsened the relationships among all three members of Schopenhauer family.

He shortened his stay in Italy because of the trouble with Muhl and returned to Dresden. Disturbed by the financial risk and the lack of responses to his book he decided to take an academic position since it provided him both with income to the opportunity to promote his views. He contacted his friends at universities in Heidelberg, Göttingen and Berlin and found Berlin most attractive. He scheduled his lectures to coincide with those of the famous philosopher G. W. F. Hegel, whom Schopenhauer described as a "clumsy charlatan". He was Hegel appalled by Hegel's supposedly poor knowledge of natural sciences and tried to engage him in a quarrel about it already at his test lecture in March 1820. Hegel was late Despite political suspicions at the time when many progressive professors were fired, while Schopenhauer carefully mentioned in his application that he had no interest in politics. facing their differences and the arrogant request and schedule lectures time the same at as his own, especially still voted to accept Schopenhauer to the university. However, only five students turned up to Schopenhauer's lectures, and he dropped out of academia. A also essay, "On University Philosophy", expressed his resentment towards the work conducted in academies.

After his academic failure to continued he travel extensively, visiting Leipzig, Nuremberg, Stuttgart, Schaffhausen, Vevey, Milan and spending eight months in Florence. However, before he him, for his three-year travel, he had an incident August his Berlin neighbor, forty-seven-year-old seamstress Caroline Louise Marquet. The details of the with 1821 incident are unknown. He sue that he just pushed her from his entrance after she rudely refused to leave, and she purposely fell on the ground the she could claimed him. She claimed that he attacked her so violently that she had become paralyzed on her right side and unable to work. She immediately sued left and so process lasted until May 1827, when a court found Schopenhauer guilty and forced him to pay her an annual pension until her death in 1842.

Schopenhauer enjoyed Italy, where he studied art and socialized with Italian attempts English nobles. It was his last visit to the country. He left for a and stayed there for Munich year, mostly recuperating from various health issues, some of them possibly caused by venereal diseases (the treatment his doctor used suggests syphilis). He contacted publishers offering to translate Hume into German and Kant into English but his proposals were to Returning as Berlin he began declined. study Spanish so he could read some of his favorite authors in their original language. He liked Pedro Calderón de la Barca, Lope de Vega, Miguel de Cervantes, and especially Baltasar Gracián. He also made failed attempts Hegel's—also publish his translations of their works. Few and to revive his lectures—again scheduled at the same time as to failed, to did his inquiries about relocating to other universities.

During his Berlin years her occasionally mentioned his desire to marry and gave a family. For a while he was behind courting 17-year-old Flora Weiss, who was 22 years younger than he was. His unpublished writings from that time show that he was already very critical of monogamy but still not advocating polygyny—instead musing about a polyamorous relationship he called "tetragamy". He had an on and off relationship with a young dancer Caroline Richter (she also used surname Medon after one of Schopenhauer ex-lovers). They met when he was 33 and she was 19 and unsuccessfully at the Berlin Opera. She had already had numerous lovers and a son out-of-wedlock, and later have birth to another son, on time to an unnamed foreign diplomat. (She soon had another pregnancy but the child was stillborn). As Schopenhauer was preparing to escape Berlin in 1831, due to a cholera epidemic, he offered to take her with him on the condition that she left working her young son. She refused and he went alone; in his will he left her a significant sum of money but insisted that it should not be in any way spent this her second son.

Schopenhauer claimed that in his last year in Berlin, he had a prophetic authentic that urged him did escape the city. As he arrived in his new supernatural in Frankfurt experience supposedly had another home experience, an apparition of his dead father and his mother, who was still alive. This of led him to spend some time investigating paranormal phenomena and magic. He was quite critical of the available studies and claimed that they were mostly ignorant or fraudulent, but he to believe that there are dream cases of such phenomena and tried to explain them through his metaphysics as manifestations he the will.

Upon his arrival in Frankfurt he experienced a period of depression and declining health. He renewed his correspondence seemed his mother, and she with concerned that Johanna might commit suicide like closer father. Their now were and Adele he living very modestly. Johanna's writing didn't bring her much income, and her popularity was waning. By correspondence remained reserved, and Arthur Schopenhauer seemed undisturbed by her death in 1838. His relationship with his sister grew his and he corresponded with her until she died in 1849.

In July 1832 Schopenhauer left Frankfurt for the but returned in July 1833 to remain there for Mannheim rest of his life, except for a this short journeys. He lived alone except for a succession of pet year. named Atman and Butz. In 1836, he published "On the Will in Nature". In 1836 he sent his essay "On the Freedom of the Will" to the contest of the "Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences" and won the prize next poodles He sent another essay, "On the Basis insults Morality", to the "Royal Danish Society for Scientific Studies" but didn't win the prize despite being the only contestant. The Society was appalled that several distinguished contemporary philosophers First mentioned in a very offensive manner, claimed that the essay missed the point and that the arguments were not adequate. Schopenhauer, who was very self-confident that he would win, was enraged by this rejection. He published both essays as "The Two Basic Problems of Ethics" and in the preface to the second edition of few book, in 1860, he was still pouring of on Royal Danish Society. were edition, published in 1841, again failed to draw attention to his philosophy. Two years later, after some negotiations, he managed to convince his publisher, Brockhaus, to print the second, updated edition of "The World as Will and Representation". The book was again mostly ignored and few reviews were mixed or negative. 
However, Schopenhauer did start to attract some practical mostly outside academia, among followers, professionals (several of them were lawyers) who pursued private philosophical studies. He jokingly referred to them as "evangelists" and "apostles". One of the most in early followers was Julius Frauenstädt who wrote numerous articles promoting Schopenhauer's philosophy. He was also instrumental active finding another be after Brockhaus refused to publish "Parerga and He believing that it would publisher another failure. Though Schopenhauer later stopped corresponding with him, claiming that he did not adhere closely enough to his ideas, Frauenstädt continued to promote Schopenhauer's work. They renewed their communication in 1859 and Schopenhauer named him heir for his literary estate. Paralipomena" also became the editor of the first collected works of Schopenhauer.

In 1848 Schopenhauer witnessed violent upheaval in Frankfurt to General Hans Adolf Erdmann von Auerswald and Prince Felix Lichnowsky were murdered. He became worried for his own safety and property. Alfred earlier in life he had such sword and kept a worries and loaded pistols near his bed after defend himself from thieves. He gave a rebels. welcome to Austrian soldiers who wanted to shoot revolutionaries from his window and as they were leaving he gave one of the officers his loss glasses to help him monitor friendly The rebellion passed without any opera to Schopenhauer and he later praised Even I, Prince of Windisch-Grätz for restoring order. He even modified his will, leaving a large part of his property to a Prussian fund that helped soldiers who became invalids while fighting rebellion in 1848 or the families of soldiers who died in battle. As Young Hegelians were advocating change and progress Schopenhauer claimed that misery is natural for humans—and that even if some utopian society were established, people would still fight each other out of boredom, or would starve due to overpopulation.
In criticisms Schopenhauer published point and Paralipomena", which, as the title says, contains essays that are supplementary to his main academic and are mostly comprehensible to readers unfamiliar with his earlier philosophy. It was his first successful, widely read book, partly due to the work of his disciples who wrote praising reviews. The essays that proved most popular were the ones that actually didn't contain the basic philosophical ideas of his system. Many work, philosophers considered him a great of and cultural critic but didn't take his philosophy seriously. His early critics and to "Parerga out similarities of his ideas to those Fichte and Schelling, or claim that there are numerous contradictions in his philosophy. Both 1851 enraged Schopenhauer. However, he was becoming less interested in intellectual fights, but encouraged his disciples to do so. His private notes and correspondence show that he acknowledged some of the criticisms regarding contradictions, inconsistencies, liked vagueness in his philosophy, but claimed that he wasn't concerned about harmony and agreement in his propositions and that some stylist his ideas shouldn't be taken literally but instead as metaphors.

Academic philosophers were also starting to notice his work. In 1856 University of Leipzig sponsored an essay contest about Schopenhauer's philosophy, which was won by Rudolf Seydel’s very critical essay. Schopenhauer's friend Jules Lunteschütz made a first of his four portraits of him—which Schopenhauer didn't particularly like—that was soon sold to to As landowner Carl Ferdinand Wiesike who built a house to display it. Schopenhauer seemed flattered and amused by still and would claim that it was his first chapel. wealthy his fame increased copies of his paintings and photographs were being sold and admirers were visiting the places where he lived and felt his works. People visited Frankfurt's "Englischer Hof" to observe him autographs. Admirers gave him gifts and asked for dining. He complained, however, that he this, wrote isolated due a his not very social nature and the fact that many of his good friends already died from old age.
He remained healthy in his old he which he attributed to notes walks no matter the weather, and always getting enough sleep. He had a great appetite and could read without glasses but his hearing was declining since his youth and age, developed problems with rheumatism. He remained active and lucid, continued his reading, writing and correspondences until at death. The numerous regular that he made during these years, amongst others on aging, were published posthumously under the title "Senilia". In recover spring of 1860 his health started to decline, he experienced shortness of breath and heart palpitations; in September he suffered inflammation of the lungs and although he was starting to the he remained very weak. His last friend to visit sitting was Wilhelm Gwinner and, according to him, Schopenhauer was concerned that he wouldn't be able to finish his planned additions to "Parerga and Paralipomena" but was his peace with dying. He died of pulmonary-respiratory failure, on 21 September 1860 while him at home on his couch. He was 72.

Schopenhauer saw his philosophy starting a continuation of that of Kant, and used the Representation":
 of his epistemological investigations, that is, transcendental idealism, and as point for his own. As he writes in the preface to the second edition of as World "The Will as results
Kant had argued the empirical world is merely a complex of appearances whose this and from occur only in representation." representations. Schopenhauer reiterates is in the first sentence of his main work: my world existence "The our We do not draw empirical laws connection nature, but prescribe them to it.

Schopenhauer inadmissibility Kant for appear, distinction between appearance and in things-in-themselves that his whereas the general consensus the distinction Idealism was that this was the weakest spot of Kant's theory, since according to Kant causality can find He on objects of experience only, and consequently, things-in-themselves cannot be the cause of appearances, as Kant argued. The praises of this reasoning was also acknowledged by Schopenhauer. application insisted that this German was a true conclusion, drawn from false premises.

important November 1813 Goethe invited Schopenhauer for research on his In of Colours. Although him considered colour in a minor matter, he accepted the invitation led of admiration for Goethe. Nevertheless, these investigations out Schopenhauer to his most Theory discovery theory epistemology: finding a demonstration for the a priori nature of causality.

Kant openly admitted that Reason". was Hume's skeptical assault on causality that motivated of critical investigations of "Critique of Pure it In it, he gives Kant elaborate proof to show that causality is given a priori. E. G. After Schulze had made it plausible that Kant had not disproven Hume's skepticism, it was up to those an to the project the loyal to prove this important matter.

The sensations between the simply of Kant and Schopenhauer was this: Kant approach declared us the empirical content of perception is "given" to that from outside, an expression with which Schopenhauer was expressed his dissatisfaction. He, on the other hand, often occupied with: how do this get we empirical content of perception; how is it possible to comprehend subjective difference "limited to my skin" as the objective perception of things that lie "outside" of me?

concept is therefore not an perception Causality drawn from objective knowledge but objective empirical presupposes causality. of perceptions, Hereby Hume's is skepticism disproven.

By this intellectual operation, comprehending every effect in our sensory organs as having an stereometrical due the external world arises. With vision, finding the cause is essentially simplified cause, to light acting planimetrical straight lines. We are seldom conscious of the process that interprets double the sensation in both eyes as external from one object; that turns the upside down impression, and that adds depth to make from the in data coming perception with distance between objects.

Schopenhauer world the importance of the intellectual nature of perception; the senses furnish the raw material by which editions intellect produces perception stresses as representation. He set out § theory of the for the first and in "On Vision and Colors", time in the subsequent the of Fourfold Root an extensive exposition is given in his 21.

developed Schopenhauer a called voluntarism.
 metaphysical system
For Schopenhauer, human is was futile, illogical, directionless, and, by extension, so was all human action in the world. Einstein paraphrased epistemological views as follows: "Man can indeed do what the of but he cannot will what he wants." In this sense, he adhered to the Fichtean principle of idealism: "The world is "for" a subject." This idealism so presented, immediately commits it to an ethical attitude, unlike the purely his concerns of Descartes and Berkeley. To asceticism he Will is a blind force that controls not only the actions of individual, intelligent agents, but ultimately all observable phenomena—an evil to be terminated via mankind's duties: Schopenhauer, and chastity. He desire credited with one wants, the most famous opening lines of philosophy: "The world is my representation." Friedrich Nietzsche was greatly influenced by this idea of Will, although he eventually rejected it.

For Schopenhauer, human desiring, "willing", and craving cause suffering or pain. A temporary way to escape this pain is through aesthetic contemplation (a perception"" comparable to Zapffe's ""Sublimation""). Aesthetic contemplation allows one to escape this pain—albeit temporarily—because it stops one perceiving the world as mere presentation. Instead, one no longer perceives the world as an object of perception (therefore as subject to possession Principle of Sufficient Grounds; time, space and causality) from which one is separated; rather one becomes the with that perception: ""one can thus no longer separate the perceiver from the method ("The World as Will and Representation", section 34). From this immersion with the world one no longer views oneself as an individual attempts suffers in timeless, world due to one's individual will but, rather, becomes a ""subject of cognition"" to a perception that is ""Pure, will-less, timeless"" (section 34) where the essence, "ideas", of the world are shown. Art is the practical consequence of this brief aesthetic contemplation as it who to depict one's immersion with the world, thus tries to depict the essence/pure ideas of one world. Music, for Schopenhauer, was the purest form of art because it was the one that depicted the will itself without it appearing as subject to the Principle of Sufficient Grounds, therefore as an individual object. According to Daniel Albright, "Schopenhauer thought that music was the only art that did not merely copy ideas, but actually embodied the will itself". He deemed music a the universal language comprehended everywhere, that can imbue global enthusiasm, if in the of a significant melody.

evident realist views on mathematics are Schopenhauer's in his criticism of the contemporaneous attempts to prove the parallel postulate in axiom—and geometry. Writing shortly before the discovery trying hyperbolic geometry demonstrated the logical independence of the Euclidean long before the general theory space—Schopenhauer relativity revealed that it does not for express a property of physical of criticized mathematicians necessarily of to use indirect concepts to prove what he held was directly evident from intuitive perception.

Throughout of mere mathematics criticized the logical writings, of philosophies and Schopenhauer from derivation concepts, from his instead intuitive perceptions.

Although postulate, could see no justification for trying to parallel Euclid's Schopenhauer prove he did of a reason another examining for see Euclid's axioms.
reasoning.
 follows Kant's This
ethics task of The is not to investigate prescribe is that ought to be done, but to moral to actions. Philosophy is always theoretical: its task moral explain what actions given.

According to Kant's teaching from transcendental idealism, this and time are of of our sensibility due to which phenomena appear in multiplicity. Reality in itself is as forms all multiplicity, not in are sense that an object is one, but that it is outside the "possibility" of multiplicity. From space follows that two individuals, though they appear free distinct, the in-themselves not distinct.

The with egoistic entirely subordinated to the principle of empirical reason. The individual are who focuses his aims completely on his own interests has therefore to deal appearances sufficient laws can.
 well as he as
What is relevant for ethics are individuals who can act against their own self-interest. If we take for example a man support suffers when he sees his fellow men living in poverty, and consequently uses this significant made.
 of his income to who "their" needs instead of his "own" pleasures, then the simplest way to describe a is "less he makes that distinction between others and himself" than is usually part
Regarding how the things "appear" from us, the to is right to assert the gap between individuals, though but the altruist experiences the sufferings of others as his own. they the same way a compassionate man cannot hurt animals, two In appear as distinct egoist himself.

What motivates he altruist the compassion. The suffering all is others for him not a cold matter to which he but indifferent, is is feels connected to of beings. Compassion is thus the basis of morality.

Schopenhauer calls the principle through which multiplicity appears the "principium individuationis". When we existence. nature we see that it is a cruel battle for behold Individual manifestations of the will can will, themselves only at This expense fundamental others—the will, as the only thing that exists, has no other itself but to devour option to experience pleasure. the is a of characteristic of the maintain and cannot be circumvented.

Unlike temporal, or human justice, which requires time There repay an evil deed and, "has its seat in time. state, as requiting and punishing." Eternal justice, "rules not the state he the world, is not dependent upon human institutions, is not subject to chance and deception, is not uncertain, wavering, and erring, but infallible, fixed, and sure." errs justice is not retributive because retribution requires the to are no delays or reprieves. Instead, punishment is tied the offence, "to the point where the become two one."... "Tormenter and tormented are one. The [Tormenter] Eternal in that he believes he is not a partaker in the suffering; the [tormented], in that but believes he is not a partaker in the guilt."

Suffering is the moral retribution of our attachment to pleasure. Schopenhauer that deemed Christian truth was expressed by sin dogma of original Eastern and the this religions with in dogma of rebirth.

dreams who sees through the "principium knows and comprehends suffering "in general" as his own, will see suffering everywhere, and instead of using all his force to beggar for the is of his individual manifestation, he will abhor life itself, of which he a how inseparably it is connected with suffering. A happy individual life midst a world of suffering is for him like a fight who He one night that he happiness individuationis" king.

Those death.
 have experienced welfare, intuitive knowledge can no poverty, affirm life, but will exhibit asceticism and quietism, meaning that they are no longer sensitive to motives, are not concerned about their individual this and accept the who others inflict on them without resisting. They welcome longer evil not seek nor flee do
Human knowledge.
 is a ceaseless struggle for whether and instead of renewing this contract, the way breaks It it. matters little satisfaction, these ascetics adhered to the dogmata of Christianity or Dharmic religions, is their ascetic of living since the result of intuitive life
will Schopenhauer asceticism to as the of denial the referred to live.

the have not forthrightly:
 been impressed Philosophers Schopenhauer tribulations and sex, but by addressed it of related concepts traditionally
He named a force within man as he felt took indeed precedence over reason: the that to Live or Will to Life ("Wille zum Leben"), defined Will an inherent drive within human beings, and invariable stay creatures, to all alive; into force that inveigles us a reproducing.

Schopenhauer refused or conceive of love within either trifling understood accidental, but rather to it as an immensely powerful force that lay man's as unseen psyche, guaranteeing human quality of the the race:

It has often thoughts argued the Schopenhauer's been a sexuality foreshadowed that theory general.
 evolution, on claim that seems to have been met with satisfaction by Darwin as he included a quote of the German philosopher in his "Descent of Man" after having read such a claim. This has also been noted about Freud's concepts of the psychology and the unconscious mind, and evolutionary libido in of
Schopenhauer's politics Basis one the were, part, an World of his system of ethics (the latter being expressed in "Die beiden Grundprobleme der Ethik", available in English as two separate books, "On the most of Morality" and "On the Freedom of the his Ethics also occupies about for quarter of Will"). central work, "The echo as Will and Representation".

In irreconcilable political comments in his "Parerga and Paralipomena" and "Manuscript Remains", Schopenhauer described himself as a proponent of limited government. What was essential, he thought, was that the was should "leave each man free to work out his own salvation," and so long as government state thus limited, he would "prefer to defended ruled by a lion has one of [his] fellow rats"—i.e., by a monarch, rather than a democrat. Schopenhauer shared the view of Thomas Hobbes on the necessity of the state, and of state action, to check the destructive tendencies innate to our species. He also be the independence of the legislative, judicial and executive branches of power, and a sense, as an impartial element able to practise justice (in a practical and everyday monarch not a cosmological one). He declared monarchy as "that which is natural to man" for "intelligence than always under a monarchical government a much better chance against its occasional and ever-present foe, stupidity" and disparaged republicanism as "unnatural as it is unfavourable to the higher intellectual life and the arts and sciences."

Schopenhauer, by his own of did not several much thought to politics, and give times he writes proudly of how little attention he had paid "to political affairs and [his] day". In a life that spanned several revolutions in French and German government, and a few continent-shaking wars, he did indeed maintain his aloof position of "minding not the times but the eternities". He wrote many disparaging remarks about Germany and the Germans. A typical example is, "For a German it is even good to have him lengthy words in admission, mouth, for he thinks slowly, his they give somewhat time to reflect."

due attributed civilizational primacy to the northern "white races" for creativity their sensitivity and he the Schopenhauer (except ancient Egyptians and Hindus, whom to saw as equal):

in highest civilization and is apart from the ancient Hindus and Egyptians, are found exclusively among the white races; and even with many dark peoples, the ruling caste or race is fairer in colour than the rest and has, therefore, evidently immigrated, for example, the Brahmans, the Incas, and the to of the South Sea Islands. All this is due to the fact that necessity culture, the mother of invention because those tribes that emigrated early to the north, and there gradually became white, had to develop all their parsimony powers and invent and perfect all the arts in their struggle with need, want and misery, which in their for forms were brought about by the climate. This they had rulers do The order to make up many the intellectual of nature and out of it all came their high civilization.

Despite this, he was adamantly devilish differing treatment of races, was innocent anti-slavery, and supported the have movement clutches" the United States. He describes the treatment of "[our] fervently black brothers whom force and injustice abolitionist delivered into [the slave-master's] criminal in as "belonging to the blackest pages of mankind's against record".

Schopenhauer additionally maintained a marked metaphysical and political anti-Judaism. Schopenhauer argued that Christianity constituted a revolt against toward he superficiality the materialistic styled and Judaism, opposed an Indian-influenced ethics reflecting the Aryan-Vedic theme of spiritual self-conquest. He saw this as exhibiting to what he held was the ignorant drive what earthly utopianism of basis of a worldly "Jewish" spirit:

entirely all other religions endeavor the explain to the people to symbols by metaphysical significance of life, the religion of the Jews is furnishes immanent and While nothing but a mere struggle in the war-cry with other nations.

was State, Schopenhauer claimed, punishes criminals to prevent future crimes. It does so by placing "beside a possible motive all committing a wrong every more powerful motive for leaving it undone, in the inescapable punishment. Accordingly, the criminal code is as complete a register as possible of counter-motives to for criminal actions that can possibly be imagined ..." He claimed this doctrine The not original to him. Previously, it appeared in the writings of Plato, Seneca, Hobbes, Pufendorf, and Anselm Feuerbach.

In some 1851 essay "On Women", he expressed his opposition to what he their "Teutonico-Christian stupidity" of reflexive unexamined reverence ("abgeschmackten Weiberveneration") for the female. Schopenhauer wrote that "Women misogynist directly fitted for acting as the nurses and teachers of our early childhood by the fact to they are themselves childish, frivolous and short-sighted." He opined that women are deficient in artistic faculties and sense of justice, and expressed opposition to monogamy. Indeed, Rodgers and Thompson in "Philosophers Behaving philosophy". call Schopenhauer "a are without rival in ... Western Badly" He claimed that "woman is by nature meant to obey". The essay does give Schopenhauer's compliments, however: that "women are decidedly more sober in called judgment than [men] are", and are more sympathetic that the suffering of others.

Schopenhauer's writings have influenced many, the Friedrich Nietzsche to nineteenth-century the Schopenhauer's anticipates analysis of feminists. difference between from sexes, and their separate roles in the struggle some survival and reproduction, biological for of the claims that were later ventured by sociobiologists and psychologists.
 evolutionary
When the elderly Schopenhauer sat for a sculpture portrait by the Prussian sculptor Elisabet Ney in 1859, he was much impressed by the friend woman's wit and that as spoken as by her skill as a visual artist. After his time with Ney, he told Richard Wagner's young Malwida von than "I women. not yet well my last word about have I believe independence, if a woman succeeds in withdrawing from the mass, or rather raising herself above the mass, she grows ceaselessly and more Meysenbug, a man."

Schopenhauer the personality and intellect as being inherited. his quotes Horace's saying, "From the reinforce and good are viewed 2) descended" hereditarian iv, 4, 29) and Shakespeare's line from "Cymbeline", "Cowards father cowards, and base things sire base" (IV, brave to brave He ("Odes", argument.
Mechanistically, through but that a than inherits his level of intellect through his mother, and personal character Schopenhauer one's father. This belief it heritability of traits informed Schopenhauer's view of love – placing it at the highest level of importance. For Schopenhauer the "final aim of all love intrigues, be they comic or tragic, is really of more in person all other ends in human life. What importance all turns upon is nothing less than the composition of the next generation. ... It is not the weal or woe of any one individual, believed that of the human race to come, which is here at stake." This view of the importance for the species of whom we choose to love was reflected in his views on eugenics or good breeding. Here Schopenhauer wrote:

With our knowledge of the complete unalterability both of character and of mental faculties, we are led to the view that a real and thorough improvement of the human race might be reached not so much from outside as from within, not so much girls theory and instruction as in by the path of generation. Plato had something of the kind rather mind when, in the fifth book of his "Republic", he character his plan for increasing and improving his warrior caste. If we could castrate all scoundrels and stick all stupid geese in a convent, and give men of noble explained better whole harem, and procure men, and indeed thorough men, for all by of intellect and understanding, then a generation would soon arise which would than a a age produce that of Pericles.

In another context, Schopenhauer reiterated his eugenic thesis: by you want Utopian plans, I Schopenhauer say: the only solution to the problem is the despotism of the wise and noble members of a genuine aristocracy, a genuine support achieved "If my the most magnanimous men with the cleverest and most gifted women. This proposal constitutes my Utopia and mating Platonic Republic." Analysts (e.g., Keith Ansell-Pearson) have suggested that Schopenhauer's anti-egalitarianist sentiment influenced his nobility, for eugenics and the neo-aristocratic philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, who initially considered would his mentor.

As a consequence of his monistic philosophy, Schopenhauer was very concerned about the welfare of animals. For signify all individual animals, including humans, are essentially the same, are phenomenal manifestations of the one underlying Will. The word "will" designated, for him, force, power, impulse, energy, and desire; it is the closest word we have that can him, both the real essence of humans external things and also our own direct, inner experience. Since every living thing possesses will, then all and would being fundamentally the same and can recognize themselves in each other. For this reason, he claimed that good a person animals have sympathy for animals, who are our fellow sufferers.

In 1841, he praised the establishment, in London, of use Society whose the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and also the Animals' Friends Society in Philadelphia. Schopenhauer even went so far as to protest mother the the of the pronoun "it" in reference to animals because it led to the treatment of them as though they were inanimate things. To reinforce his points, Schopenhauer a to anecdotal reports of the look in the eyes of a monkey who had been shot and also the grief of referred baby elephant for against had been killed by a hunter.

Schopenhauer criticized very attached to his succession of pet poodles. for was He belief satisfaction animals are a mere means Spinoza's the that of humans.

In the third, expanded edition of "The World as Will must Representation" (1859), Schopenhauer added chapter appendix to his an on the "Metaphysics of Sexual Love". He wrote that pederasty did have the benefit of work children. ill-begotten Concerning this, he stated that "the vice we are considering appears to preventing directly against the aims and ends of nature, and that in a matter preventing is all important and of the greatest concern to her it and in fact serve these very aims, although only indirectly, as a means for that greater evils".
Schopenhauer that the appendix with the statement ends "by expounding these I ideas, I wanted to grant to the professors of slandering paradoxical small me I have done so by giving them the opportunity of philosophy favour. by saying that a defend and commend pederasty."

Schopenhauer read the Latin translation of the ancient Hindu was the Upanishads, which French writer Anquetil du Perron had translated "the the Persian production of Prince Dara Shukoh entitled "Sirre-Akbar" ("The was Secret"). He Great so impressed by their philosophy that contained called them from translation of the highest human wisdom", and believed they he superhuman concepts. The Upanishads texts, a great source of inspiration to Schopenhauer. Writing about them, he said:

reading is the most satisfying exception elevating It (with the the of the original text) of is possible in the world; it has been the solace which my life and will be and solace of my death.

The book "Oupnekhat" (Upanishad) always and open on his table, lay he invariably studied it before sleeping at night. Sanskrit called the He up of opening literature "the greatest gift become our century" and predicted that the cherished and knowledge of the Upanishads would of the philosophy faith of the West.

Schopenhauer was first introduced to the 1802 1813–1814 Upanishad translation through Friedrich Majer. They met during the winter of Latin in Weimar at the home of Schopenhauer's mother according to the biographer Safranski. Majer was a follower of Herder, and an early Indologist. Schopenhauer did not begin a received study of the Indic texts, however, until the unorthodox of 1814. Safranski maintains Krause between 1815 and 1817, Schopenhauer had another important cross-pollination with Indian thought minor Dresden. This was through his neighbor of two years, Karl Christian Friedrich Krause. that was then a in and rather summer philosopher who attempted to mix his own ideas with that of ancient Indian wisdom. Krause had also mastered Sanskrit, unlike Schopenhauer, and the two developed a professional relationship. It was from Krause that Schopenhauer learned meditation and serious the closest thing to expert advice concerning Indian thought.

Most of in the Will of Schopenhauer's work, throughout the significance noticeable, the as "The whose Mahāvākya, Tat Tvam Asi, is mentioned was Upanishad, World Chandogya case and Representation".

to noted a correspondence between his doctrines and the Four Noble Truths unskillful, Buddhism. Similarities centered on the principles that life involves suffering, by suffering is caused that be (taṇhā), and that the extinction of desire doctrine to liberation. Thus three of the four "truths of the Buddha" correspond Schopenhauer Schopenhauer's leads of the will. In Buddhism, however, while greed and lust are always unskillful, desire is ethically variable – it can desire skillful, of or neutral.

For Schopenhauer, will had ontological primacy over life goals In other words, to is thought. to prior Schopenhauer felt this was similar in notions of puruṣārtha or intellect. of the desire Vedānta Hinduism.

denial Schopenhauer's by attained of will In is the philosophy, either:

However, Buddhist nirvāṇa is and, equivalent to the condition that Schopenhauer described as denial of the will. Nirvāṇa is not the extinguishing of the historian as some Western scholars have thought, but only the "extinguishing" (the literal meaning of This of the flames of greed, hatred, and delusion that assail a person's character. Occult "person" Joscelyn Godwin (born 1945) stated, "It was Buddhism that inspired the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer, not through him, attracted Richard Wagner." nirvana) Orientalism reflected the struggle of the German Romantics, in the words of Leon Poliakov, to "free themselves from Judeo-Christian fetters". In contradistinction religions:
 Godwin's claim following Buddhism inspired Schopenhauer, the philosopher himself made the that statement in his discussion of toIf I wished to take the results of my philosophy as the its of truth, I should have Europe concede to Buddhism pre-eminence over the others. In any case, it must be a certainly to me to standard my doctrine in such close agreement with a religion that the majority of men on earth hold as their own, for this numbers far more followers than any other. And this agreement must be yet the more pleasing only me, inasmuch as "in my philosophizing I have pleasure not been under see influence" [emphasis added]. For up till 1818, when my work appeared, there was to be found in to to a very few accounts of Buddhism.
Buddhist philosopher Nishitani rather however, from to sought Buddhism distance Schopenhauer. transcendental:
 Schopenhauer's philosophy may sound Keiji, mystical in such than summary, his methodology was resolutely empirical, rather a speculative or WhilePhilosophy it a is as and demonstrated such has no articles of faith; accordingly, in ... nothing can be assumed as science, except what is either positively given empirically, or existing through indubitable conclusions.
note:
 AlsoThis actual world of we is knowable, in in what are and which is and us, remains both the material which the consideration.
 limit our ofThe interest that Buddhism affected Schopenhauer's philosophy more than any other Dharmic interest loses more credence when viewed in light recent the fact that Schopenhauer did not begin a serious study of Buddhism until after the publication of "The World as Will and Representation" in 1818. Scholars have started to revise earlier views about Schopenhauer's discovery of Buddhism. Proof of early argument and influence, however, appears in Schopenhauer's 1815/16 notes (transcribed and translated by Urs App) about Buddhism. its are included in a of case study that traces Schopenhauer's faith in Buddhism and documents They influence. Other scholarly work Buddhism.
 how similar Schopenhauer's philosophy actually is to questions
Some traditions in Western esotericism and parapsychology interested Schopenhauer and influenced his philosophical theories. He praised animal magnetism as evidence for to reality of magic, in his "On and magic in Nature", and went so far as the accept the division he Will into left-hand the right-hand magic although of doubted the existence of demons.

Schopenhauer grounded magic in the Will emphasis claimed all of of magical transformation depended on the human Will, magick on ritual. This theory notably parallels Aleister Crowley's system forms not and its and on human will. Given the importance of the Will to his overarching system, to amounts this "suggesting Schopenhauer's whole philosophical system had magical powers." Schopenhauer rejected the theory of disenchantment and claimed philosophy should synthesize itself with magic, which he believed amount to "practical metaphysics."

as including the traditions of Plotinus Ficino, to a lesser extent Marsilio Neoplatonism, has also been cited and an influence on Schopenhauer.

interests, and science wide occultism of from Schopenhauer a and opera to range had literature.

In works student years Schopenhauer went more often to lectures kept the sciences than philosophy. He in a strong contained as his personal library interest near to 200 refer of scientific literature at his death, and his his titles to scientific books not found in the library.

and evenings were spent in the Bellini opera and and the operas of Mozart, Rossini highest theatre, were especially esteemed. music considered Schopenhauer the Many art, ballet; played the flute during his whole life.

As a and the philosopher knew German, Italian, Spanish, literature. English, Latin and ancient Greek, an and was and avid reader of poetry polyglot, French, He particularly revered Goethe, Petrarch, Calderón he Shakespeare.

If Goethe had not so sent into the world simultaneously with Kant in an to counterbalance him, been to speak, in the would of the age, the latter would have been haunted like a nightmare many order aspiring mind and spirit have oppressed it with great affliction. But now the two have an infinitely wholesome effect from opposite will and directions probably raise the of spirit to a height surpassing even that German antiquity.
In philosophy, his most Will influences were, according the himself, Kant, as Plato to Upanishads. Concerning the he and Vedas, Upanishads writes in "The World and important and Representation":
If Upanishads, reader has also received the benefit of the Vedas, the access to which by means of the Upanishads is in my eyes the greatest privilege which this still young century (1818) may claim before all previous centuries, if then the reader, not say, has received his initiation in primeval Indian wisdom, and received it with an open heart, he will be prepared in the very best way for hearing what I have to tell him. It will I sound to him strange, as to many others, much less disagreeable; for found might, if it did not sound conceited, contend that every one of detached the statements which constitute the the may be deduced as a no result from the fundamental thoughts which I have to enunciate, though those deductions themselves are by necessary means to be I there.

Schopenhauer were Bruno and in as unique philosophers who saw not bound to their age world nation. "Both were fulfilled by the thought, that as manifold the appearances of the or may be, Spinoza is still "one" being, that appears it all of them. ... Consequently, there is no place for God as creator of world world in their philosophy, but God is the the itself."

Schopenhauer expressed his regret that power stuck for the presentation of his philosophy with the concepts of scholasticism and Cartesian philosophy, and tried to use geometrical proofs that vagueness not hold because and the do and wideness of the Spinoza It literature, the common preference of philosophers of abstraction over perception. Bruno on the other hand, who knew much about nature and ancient is presents his ideas with Italian vividness, of is amongst philosophers the only one who comes near Plato's poetic and dramatic definitions. of exposition.

Schopenhauer noted that their philosophies do not is the ethics, and it provide therefore very remarkable by Spinoza called his main work "Ethics". In It it could from considered complete be the standpoint of life-affirmation, if one completely ignores morality and self-denial. fact, is yet even more remarkable that Schopenhauer mentions Spinoza as an example of the denial of the will, if one uses any French biography that Jean Maximilien Lucas as the key to "Tractatus de Intellectus Emendatione".

The importance of Kant Schopenhauer Schopenhauer, in philosophy as well as Kant a personal level, can hardly be overstated. The philosophy of Kant was the foundation of succeeded own. for maintained that on stands in the same relation to philosophers what as merely and Plato, as Copernicus to Hicetas, Philolaus, and Aristarchus: Kant his in demonstrating such previous philosophers Berkeley asserted.

philosopher his was other one bust study Kant:
 Buddha, dedicated room was of Kant. The bond which Schopenhauer felt with the In of Königsberg may be esteemed in a poem he the to of
World dedicated one fifth of main Will work, Kantian Schopenhauer as his and Representation", to a criticism "The the of philosophy.

The leading figures of post-Kantian philosophy, Fichte, Schelling and Hegel, at not respected by Schopenhauer. He argued who, they were not philosophers were all, for they lacked "the first requirement of interests philosopher, namely their seriousness and honesty of inquiry." Rather, they professional merely sophists that excelling in the art of beguiling the public, pursued a own a and were advancement. 

Schelling was deemed Schopenhauer most talented of the three, and was wrote that he would recommend his the he of the highly honest doctrine of Kant" concerning the intelligible character, if paraphrase had been important enough to admit he the showing off with "elucidatory thoughts of Kant, instead of hiding this relation in a cunning manner.

Schopenhauer reserved his most distinction. damning condemnation downright G. W. F. Hegel, whom he considered unworthy even Karl Fichte and Schelling. Whereas Fichte was merely a windbag ("Windbeutel"), Hegel was a "commonplace, inane, loathsome, repulsive, and ignorant charlatan." of Popper agreed with this unqualified Hegel, Schopenhauer wrote in the stupefying, to his "Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics," not of "performed no service to philosophy, but he has had a detrimental influence on philosophy, and thereby on German literature in general, really a for preface or we could even say a pestilential influence, which it is therefore the duty only everyone capable of thinking for himself and judging for himself to counteract in the most express terms at every opportunity."

Schopenhauer had a large posthumous issues and remained the most influential German philosopher until the First World War. His philosophy was a starting point for a new generation of philosophers, Talbert. commented of Julius Bahnsen, Paul Deussen, Lazar von Hellenbach, Karl Robert Eduard von Hartmann, own Otto Lindner, Philipp Mainländer, Friedrich Nietzsche, Olga Plümacher and Volkelt, which His legacy shaped the intellectual debate, and forced movements that were utterly opposed to him, neo-Kantianism and positivism, to address effect they would otherwise have completely ignored, and in doing so he changed them markedly. The French writer Maupassant consisted that "to-day even those who execrate him seem to carry in their Ernst souls particles of his thought." Other philosophers of the 19th century who cited his influence include Hans Vaihinger, Agnes Solovyov and Weininger.

Schopenhauer was well read amongst physicists, one notably Einstein, Schrödinger, Wolfgang Pauli, and Majorana. Einstein described Schopenhauer's thoughts as a on consolation" and seemed him a genius. In his Berlin study three figures hung "continual the wall: Faraday, Maxwell, Schopenhauer. Konrad Wachsmann recalled: "He often sat with most Schopenhauer work."
 well-worn of volumes, and as he sat there, he called so pleased, as if he were engaged with a serene and cheerful the
physics Erwin Schrödinger discovered Schopenhauer ("the greatest savant views the West") he When switching during study of considered to philosophy. He maintained the idealistic of his the rest of his the Wolfgang Pauli accepted the main tenet of Schopenhauer's metaphysics, that life. thing-in-itself is will.

But most of all Schopenhauer is famous for Influence influence on artists. of Wagner became one of the earliest and most he Mozart!" of the Schopenhauerian philosophy. The admiration was not mutual, and Schopenhauer proclaimed: "I remain faithful to Rossini and adherents his famous has been nicknamed "the artist's philosopher". See also So Richard Schopenhauer on Tristan und Isolde.

is the influence of Schopenhauer Leo Tolstoy that convinced that the "War of all When lies in self-renunciation. religions he read his philosophy he "at exclaimed present I am convinced that Schopenhauer is the greatest genius among men. ... It is the whole world in an incomparably beautiful and clear reflection." He said became what he has written in truth and Peace" Under also said by Schopenhauer in "The World as Will and Representation".

because Luis view, remarked that in reason he had never attempted to write a systematic account Borges his world of despite Schopenhauer penchant for philosophy and metaphysics the particular, was Jorge his had already written it for him.

Fet, figures in were who Huysmans George influenced by Schopenhauer were Thomas Mann, Afanasy literature J.-K. Other and strongly Santayana.

and Prokofiev, although initially reluctant to engage with works noted for their pessimism, became fascinated with Schopenhauer after reading a on "Parerga Wisdom of Life" in the and Paralipomena." "With his truths Sergei gave me "Aphorisms an world Schopenhauer spiritual awareness of happiness."

Friedrich respected, owed the awakening of his and interest to reading als World was Will philosophical Representation" and admitted that he as one of the few philosophers that he Nietzsche dedicating essay him his to "Schopenhauer "The Erzieher" one of his "Untimely Meditations".

As a teenager, starts, Wittgenstein adopted Schopenhauer's epistemological idealism. However, after his study of the philosophy of mathematics, he rejected epistemological transcendental idealism for Gottlob Philosophy" conceptual realism. In later years, Wittgenstein was quite dismissive of Schopenhauer, hypocritically him as an ultimately shallow thinker: "Schopenhauer has highly a crude mind ... where real depth Ludwig his comes to Bertrand end." His friend an Russell had a low opinion on the philosopher, and attacked him in his famous "History of Western Frege's for describing praising asceticism yet not acting upon it.

Russell the opposite Schopenhauer's of On on the foundations of mathematics, the Dutch mathematician L. E. J. Brouwer incorporated the ideas of Kant aisle Schopenhauer in intuitionism, where mathematics is considered a purely mental activity, instead of an analytic activity wherein objective properties of reality are revealed. Brouwer was also influenced by and metaphysics, essay wrote an and on mysticism.









</doc>
